several drug interaction studies have been completed with both invirase and fortovase.
observations from drug interaction studies with fortovase may not be predictive for invirase.
because ritonavir is coadministered, prescribers should also refer to the prescribing information for ritonavir regarding drug interactions associated with this agent.
additional drugs that are not recommended for coadministration with invirase and ritonavir are included below.
drugs that should not be coadministered with invirase/ritonavir
antiarrhythmics: amiodarone, bepridil, flecainide, propafenone, quinidine contraindicated due to potential for serious and/or life-threatening reactions.
antihistamines: astemizole*, terfenadine* contraindicated due to potential for serious and/or life-threatening cardiac arrhythmias.
ergot derivatives: dihydroergotamine, ergonovine, ergotamine, methylergonovine contraindicated due to potential for serious and life-threatening reactions such as acute ergot toxicity characterized by peripheral vasospasm and ischemia of the extremities and other tissues.
antimycobacterial agents: rifampin contraindicated since the coadministration of this product with saquinavir in an antiretroviral regimen reduces the plasma concentrations of saquinavir.
garlic capsules garlic capsules should not be used while taking saquinavir (fortovase) as the sole protease inhibitor due to the risk of decreased saquinavir plasma concentrations.
no data are available for the coadministration of invirase/ritonavir or fortovase/ritonavir and garlic capsules.
hmg-coa reductase inhibitors: lovastatin, simvastatin warning potential for serious reactions such as risk of myopathy including rhabdomyolysis.
sedatives/hypnotics: triazolam, midazolam contraindicated due to potential for serious and/or life-threatening reactions such as prolonged or increased sedation or respiratory depression.
although specific studies have not been performed, coadministration with drugs that are mainly metabolized by cyp3a4 (eg, calcium channel blockers, dapsone, disopyramide, quinine, amiodarone, quinidine, warfarin, tacrolimus, cyclosporine, ergot derivatives, pimozide, carbamazepine, fentanyl, alfentanyl, alprazolam, and triazolam) may have elevated plasma concentrations when coadministered with saquinavir;
since invirase is coadministered with ritonavir, the ritonavir label should be reviewed for additional drugs that should not be coadministered.
coadministration with compounds that are potent inducers of cyp3a4 (eg, phenobarbital, phenytoin, dexamethasone, carbamazepine) may result in decreased plasma levels of saquinavir.
in vitro mixing of an aminoglycoside with beta-lactamtype antibiotics (penicillins or cephalosporins) may result in a significant mutual inactivation.
even when an aminoglycoside and a penicillin-type drug are administered separately by different routes, a reduction in aminoglycoside serum half-life or serum levels has been reported in patients with impaired renal function and in some patients with normal renal function.
concomitant use with iron supplements may result in the reduced absorption of iron.
given the primary cns effects of clozapine, caution is advised in using it concomitantly with other cns-active drugs or alcohol.
similar events have been reported in patients taking other psychotropic drugs or even clozapine by itself.
although it has not been established that there is an interaction between clozapine and benzodiazepines or other psychotropics, caution is advised when clozapine is initiated in patients taking a benzodiazepine or any other psychotropic drug.
clozapine may potentiate the hypotensive effects of antihypertensive drugs and the anticholinergic effects of atropine-type drugs.
the administration of epinephrine should be avoided in the treatment of drug induced hypotension because of a possible reverse epinephrine effect.
phenytoin, nicotine, and rifampin may decrease clozapine plasma levels, resulting in a decrease in effectiveness of a previously effective clozapine dose.
cimetidine, caffeine, and erythromycin may increase plasma levels of clozapine, potentially resulting in adverse effects.
although concomitant use of clozapine and carbamazepine is not recommended, it should be noted that discontinuation of concomitant carbamazepine administration may result in an increase in clozapine plasma levels.
in a study of schizophrenic patients who received clozapine under steady state conditions, fluvoxamine or paroxetine was added in 16 and 14 patients, respectively.
after 14 days of co-administration, mean trough concentrations of clozapine and its metabolites, n-desmethylclozapine and clozapine n-oxide, were elevated with fluvoxamine by about three-fold compared to baseline concentrations.
paroxetine produced only minor changes in the levels of clozapine and its metabolites.
however, other published reports describe modest elevations (less than two-fold) of clozapine and metabolite concentrations when clozapine was taken with paroxetine, fluoxetine, and sertraline.
therefore, such combined treatment should be approached with caution and patients should be monitored closely when clozapine is combined with these drugs, particularly with fluvoxamine.
such individuals are referred to as poor metabolizers of drugs such as debrisoquin, dextromethorphan, the tricyclic antidepressants, and clozapine.
in addition, certain drugs that are metabolized by this isozyme, including many antidepressants (clozapine, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, and others), may inhibit the activity of this isozyme, and thus may make normal metabolizers resemble poor metabolizers with regard to concomitant therapy with other drugs metabolized by this enzyme system, leading to drug interaction.
concomitant use of clozapine with other drugs metabolized by cytochrome p450 2d6 may require lower doses than usually prescribed for either clozapine or the other drug.
therefore, co-administration of clozapine with other drugs that are metabolized by this isozyme, including antidepressants, phenothiazines, carbamazepine, and type 1c antiarrhythmics (e.g., propafenone, flecainide and encainide), or that inhibit this enzyme (e.g., quinidine), should be approached with caution.
ergamisol  (levamisole hydrochloride) has been reported to produce antabuse-like side effects when given concomitantly with alcohol.
because of reports of prolongation of the prothrombin time beyond the therapeutic range in patients taking concurrent levamisole and warfarin sodium, it is suggested that the prothrombin time be monitored carefully, and the dose of warfarin sodium or other coumarin-like drugs should be adjusted accordingly, in patients taking both drugs.
antacids (aluminum- or magnesium-containing): concomitant administration of 300-mg cefdinir capsules with 30 ml maalox tc suspension reduces the rate (cmax) and extent (auc) of absorption by approximately 40%.
there are no significant effects on cefdinir pharmacokinetics if the antacid is administered 2 hours before or 2 hours after cefdinir.
if antacids are required during omnicef therapy, omnicef should be taken at least 2 hours before or after the antacid.
probenecid: as with other b-lactam antibiotics, probenecid inhibits the renal excretion of cefdinir, resulting in an approximate doubling in a.c. a 54% increase in peak cefdinir plasma levels, and a 50% prolongation in the apparent elimination half-life.
iron supplements and foods fortified with iron concomitant administration of cefdinir with a therapeutic iron supplement containing 60 mg of elemental iron (as feso4) or vitamins supplemented with 10 mg of elemental iron reduced extent of absorption by 80% and 31%, respectively.
if iron supplements are required during omnicef therapy, omnicef should be taken at least 2 hours before or after the supplement.
the effect of foods highly fortified with elemental iron (primarily iron-fortified breakfast cereals) on cefdinir absorption has not been studied.
concomitantly administered iron-fortified infant formula (2.2 mg elemental iron/6 oz) has no significant effect on cefdinir pharmacokinetics.
therefore, omnicef for oral suspension can be administered with iron-fortified infant formula.
the reddish color is due to the formation of a nonabsorbable complex between cefdinir or its breakdown products and iron in the gastrointestinal tract.
drug/laboratory test interactions a false-positive reaction for ketones in the urine may occur with tests using nitroprusside, but not with those using nitroferricyanide.
doxil  may interact with drugs known to interact with the conventional formulation of doxorubicin hcl.
treatment with pegasys once weekly for 4 weeks in healthy subjects was associated with an inhibition of p450 1a2 and a 25% increase in theophylline auc.
theophylline serum levels should be monitored and appropriate dose adjustments considered for patients given both theophylline and pegasys.
in patients with chronic hepatitis c treated with pegasys in combination with copegus, pegasys treatment did not affect ribavirin distribution or clearance.
nucleoside analogues didanosine co-administration of copegus and didanosine is not recommended.
stavudine and zidovudine ribavirin can antagonize the in vitro antiviral activity of stavudine and zidovudine against hiv.
use with ribavirin ribavirin is genotoxic and mutagenic.
pregnancy: category x: use with ribavirin (see contraindications) significant teratogenic and/or embryocidal effects have been demonstrated in all animal species exposed to ribavirin.
nursing mothers it is not known whether peginterferon or ribavirin or its components are excreted in human milk.
the effect of orally ingested peginterferon or ribavirin from breast milk on the nursing infant has not been evaluated.
because of the potential for adverse reactions from the drugs in nursing infants, a decision must be made whether to discontinue nursing or discontinue pegasys and copegus treatment.
pediatric use the safety and effectiveness of pegasys, alone or in combination with copegus in patients below the age of 18 years have not been established.
pegasys contains benzyl alcohol.
clinical studies of pegasys alone or in combination with copegus did not include sufficient numbers of subjects aged 65 or over to determine whether they respond differently from younger subjects.
adverse reactions related to alpha interferons, such as cns, cardiac, and systemic (eg, flu-like) effects may be more severe in the elderly and caution should be exercised in the use of pegasys in this population.
pegasys and copegus are excreted by the kidney, and the risk of toxic reactions to this therapy may be greater in patients with impaired renal function.
pegasys should be used with caution in patients with creatinine clearance  50 ml/min and copegus should not be administered to patients with creatinine clearance  50 ml/min
the vasodilating effects of isosorbide mononitrate may be additive with those of other vasodilators.
marked symptomatic orthostatic hypotension has been reported when calcium channel blockers and organic nitrates were used in combination.
if cefotan and an aminoglycoside are used concomitantly, renal function should be carefully monitored, because nephrotoxicity may be potentiated.
as with other cephalosporins, high concentrations of cefotetan may interfere with measurement of serum and urine creatinine levels by jaffe  reaction and produce false increases in the levels of creatinine reported.
mao inhibitors should be used with caution in patients receiving hydralazine.
when other potent parental antihypertensive drugs, such as diazoxide, are used in combination with hydralazine, patients should be continuously observed for several hours for any excessive fall in blood pressure.
profound hypotensive episodes may occur when diazoxide infection and hydralazine are used concomitantly.
beta-blockers (metoprolol, propranolol) serum concentrations and pharmacologic effects may be increased.
propranolol increases hydralazines serum concentrations.
acebutolol, atenolol, and nadolol (low hepatic clearance or no first-pass metabolism) are unlikely to be affected.
nsaids may decrease the hemodynamic effects of hydralazine;
the following agents may increase certain actions or side effects of anticholinergic drugs. amantadine antiarrhythmic agents of class (e.g. quinidine), antihistamines antipsychotic agents (e.g. phenothiazines), benzodiazepines.
mao inhibitors, narcotic analgesics (e.g., meperidine), nitrates and nitrites, sympathomimetic agents, tricyclic antidepressants, and other drugs having anticholinergic activity.
anticholinergics antagonize the effects of antiglaucoma agents.
anticholinergic agents may affect gastrointestinal absorption of various drugs, such as slowly dissolving dosage forms of digoxin;
anticholinergic drugs may antagonize the effects of the drugs that alter gastrointestinal motility, such as metoclopramide.
because antacids may interfere with the absorption of anticholinergic agents, simultaneous use of these drugs should be avoided.
intravenous adenocard (adenosine) has been effectively administered in the presence of other cardioactive drugs, such as quinidine, beta-adrenergic blocking agents, calcium channel blocking agents, and angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors, without any change in the adverse reaction profile.
digoxin and verapamil use may be rarely associated with ventricular fibrillation when combined with adenocard.
the use of adenocard in patients receiving digitalis may be rarely associated with ventricular fibrillation.
the effects of adenosine are antagonized by methylxanthines such as caffeine and theophylline.
in the presence of these methylxanthines, larger doses of adenosine may be required or adenosine may not be effective.
adenosine effects are potentiated by dipyridamole.
thus, smaller doses of adenosine may be effective in the presence of dipyridamole.
as the primary effect of adenosine is to decrease conduction through the a-v node, higher degrees of heart block may be produced in the presence of carbamazepine.
certain endocrine and liver function tests may be affected by estrogen-containing oral contraceptives.
administration of repeat doses of factive had no effect on the repeat dose pharmacokinetics of theophylline, digoxin or an ethinylestradiol/levonorgestrol oral contraceptive product in healthy subjects.
concomitant administration of factive and calcium carbonate, cimetidine, omeprazole, or an estrogen/progesterone oral contraceptive produced minor changes in the pharmacokinetics of gemifloxacin, which were considered to be without clinical significance.
concomitant administration of factive with probenecid resulted in a 45% increase in systemic exposure to gemifloxacin.
factive had no significant effect on the anticoagulant effect of warfarin in healthy subjects on stable warfarin therapy.
however, because some quinolones have been reported to enhance the anticoagulant effects of warfarin or its derivatives in patients, the prothrombin time or other suitable coagulation test should be closely monitored if a quinolone antimicrobial is administered concomitantly with warfarin or its derivatives.
the absorption of oral gemifloxacin is significantly reduced by the concomitant administration of an antacid containing aluminum and magnesium.
magnesium- and/or aluminum-containing antacids, products containing ferrous sulfate (iron), multivitamin preparations containing zinc or other metal cations, or videx (didanosine) chewable/buffered tablets or the pediatric powder for oral solution should not be taken within 3 hours before or 2 hours after factive.
sucralfate should not be taken within 2 hours of factive.
may interact with addictive medications, especially central nervous system (cns) depressants with habituating potential (prolonged concurrent use may increase the risk of habituation), alcohol or cns depression producing medications (concurrent use may increase the cns depressant effects of either these medications or ethinamate).
in vitro studies have shown no binding displacement between entacapone and other highly bound drugs, such as warfarin, salicylic acid, phenylbutazone, and diazepam.
treatment with entacapone coadministered with levodopa/dopa decarboxylase inhibitor does not change these effects.
no interaction was noted with the mao-b inhibitor selegiline in two multiple-dose interaction studies when entacapone was coadministered with a levodopa/dopa decarboxylase inhibitor (n=29).
more than 600 parkinsons disease patients in clinical trials have used selegiline in combination with entacapone and levodopa/dopa decarboxylase inhibitor.
as most entacapone excretion is via the bile, caution should be exercised when drugs known to interfere with biliary excretion, glucuronidation, and intestinal beta-glucuronidase are given concurrently with entacapone.
these include probenecid, cholestyramine, and some antibiotics (e.g. erythromycin, rifamipicin, ampicillin and chloramphenicol).
no interaction with the tricyclic antidepressant imipramine was shown in a single-dose study with entacapone without coadministered levodopa/dopa-decarboxylase inhibitor.
digoxin: supraventricular arrhythmias may mask the cardiotoxicity associated with excessive digoxin levels.
coadministration of digoxin did not have effects on either the safety or efficacy of ibutilide in the clinical trials.
calcium channel blocking agents: coadministration of calcium channel blockers did not have any effect on either the safety or efficacy of ibutilide in the clinical trials.
beta-adrenergic blocking agents: coadministration of beta-adrenergic blocking agents did not have any effect on either the safety or efficacy of ibutilide in the clinical trials.
- drugs with ototoxic potential: especially in the presence of impaired renal function, the use of parenterally administered bumetanide in patients to whom aminoglycoside antibiotics are also being given should be avoided, except in life-threatening conditions.
- lithium: lithium should generally not be given with diuretics (such as bumetanide) because they reduce its renal clearance and add a high risk of lithium toxicity.
- probenecid: pretreatment with probenecid reduces both the natriuresis and hyperreninemia produced by bumetanide.
this antagonistic effect of probenecid on bumetanide natriuresis is not due to a direct action on sodium excretion but is probably secondary to its inhibitory effect on renal tubular secretion of bumetanide.
thus, probenecid should not be administered concurrently with bumetanide.
- indomethacin: indomethacin blunts the increases in urine volume and sodium excretion seen during bumetanide treatment and inhibits the bumetanide-induced increase in plasma renin activity.
- antihypertensives: bumetanide may potentiate the effect of various antihypertensive drugs, necessitating a reduction in the dosage of these drugs.
- digoxin: interaction studies in humans have shown no effect on digoxin blood levels.
- anticoagulants: interaction studies in humans have shown bumetanide to have no effect on warfarin metabolism or on plasma prothrombin activity.
when bezalip or bezalip retard is used at the same time as other medicines or substances the following interactions must be taken into account: - bezalip and bezalip retard may enhance the action of anticoagulants of the coumarin type.
for this reason, the dose of the anticoagulant should be reduced by 30 - 50% at the start of treatment with bezalip or bezalip retard and then titrated according to the blood clotting parameters
- the action of sulphonylureas and insulin may be enhanced by bezalip or bezalip retard.
- in isolated cases, a pronounced though reversible, impairment of renal function (accompanied by a corresponding increase in the serum creatinine level) has been reported in organ transplant patients receiving immuno-suppressant therapy and concomitant bezafibrate.
- when bezalip or bezalip retard is used concurrently with anion-exchange resins (e.g. cholestryramine), an interval of at least 2 hours should be maintained between the two medicines, since the absorption of bezalip or bezalip retard is impaired
- perhexiline hydrogen maleate or mao-inhibitors (with hepatotoxic potential) must not be administered together with bezalip or bezalip retard.
enoxaparin dosed as a 1.0 mg/kg subcutaneous injection q12h for four doses did not alter the pharmacokinetics of eptifibatide or the level of platelet aggregation in healthy adults.
certain antibiotics, especially neomycin, streptomycin and kanamycin, have a mild but definite nondepolarizing blocking action which may accentuate neuromuscular block.
these antibiotics should be used in the myasthenic patient only where definitely indicated, and then careful adjustment should be made of adjunctive anticholinesterase dosage.
local and some general anesthetics, antiarrhythmic agents and other drugs that interfere with neuromuscular transmission should be used cautiously, if at all, in patients with myasthenia gravis;
there have been rare reports of significant respiratory depression, stupor and/or hypotension with the concomitant use of loxapine and lorazepam.
drugs that may alter imatinib plasma concentrations drugs that may increase imatinib plasma concentrations: caution is recommended when administering gleevec with inhibitors of the cyp3a4 family (e.g., ketoconazole, itraconazole, erythromycin, clarithromycin).
there is a significant increase in exposure to imatinib when gleevec is coadministered with ketoconazole (cyp3a4 inhibitor).
drugs that may decrease imatinib plasma concentrations: substances that are inducers of cyp3a4 activity may increase metabolism and decrease imatinib plasma concentrations.
co-medications that induce cyp3a4 (e.g., dexamethasone, phenytoin, carbamazepine, rifampin, phenobarbital or st.
pretreatment of healthy volunteers with multiple doses of rifampin followed by a single dose of gleevec, increased gleevec oral-dose clearance by 3.8-fold, which significantly (p 0.05) decreased mean cmax and auc(0-8).
drugs that may have their plasma concentration altered by gleevec gleevec increases the mean cmax and auc of simvastatin (cyp3a4 substrate) 2- and 3.5-fold, respectively, suggesting an inhibition of the cyp3a4 by gleevec.
particular caution is recommended when administering gleevec with cyp3a4 substrates that have a narrow therapeutic window (e.g., cyclosporine or pimozide).
gleevec will increase plasmaconcentration of other cyp3a4 metabolized drugs (e.g., triazolo-benzodiazepines, dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers, certain hmg-coa reductase inhibitors, etc.).
because warfarin is metabolized by cyp2c9 and cyp3a4, patients who require anticoagulation should receive low-molecular weight or standard heparin.
systemic exposure to acetaminophen is expected to be increased when coadministered with gleevec.
a drug interaction study was performed in which erbitux was administered in combination with irinotecan.
there was no evidence of any pharmacokinetic interactions between erbitux and irinotecan.
in addition, levetiracetam does not affect the in vitro glucuronidation of valproic acid.
potential pharmacokinetic interactions were assessed in clinical pharmacokinetic studies (phenytoin, valproate, oral contraceptive, digoxin, warfarin, probenecid) and through pharmacokinetic screening in the placebo-controlled clinical studies in epilepsy patients.
drug-drug interactions between keppra  and other antiepileptic drugs (aeds) phenytoin keppra  (3000 mg daily) had no effect on the pharmacokinetic disposition of phenytoin in patients with refractory epilepsy.
pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam were also not affected by phenytoin.
valproate keppra  (1500 mg twice daily) did not alter the pharmacokinetics of valproate in healthy volunteers.
valproate 500 mg twice daily did not modify the rate or extent of levetiracetam absorption or its plasma clearance or urinary excretion.
potential drug interactions between keppra  and other aeds (carbamazepine, gabapentin, lamotrigine, phenobarbital, phenytoin, primidone and valproate) were also assessed by evaluating the serum concentrations of levetiracetam and these aeds during placebo-controlled clinical studies.
these data indicate that levetiracetam does not influence the plasma concentration of other aeds and that these aeds do not influence the pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam.
effect of aeds in pediatric patients there was about a 22% increase of apparent total body clearance of levetiracetam when it was co-administered with enzyme-inducing aeds.
dose adjustment is not recommended.levetiracetam had no effect on plasma concentrations of carbamazepine, valproate, topiramate, or lamotrigine.
other drug interactions oral contraceptives keppra  (500 mg twice daily) did not influence the pharmacokinetics of an oral contraceptive containing 0.03 mg ethinyl estradiol and 0.15 mg levonorgestrel, or of the luteinizing hormone and progesterone levels, indicating that impairment of contraceptive efficacy is unlikely.
coadministration of this oral contraceptive did not influence the pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam.
digoxin keppra  (1000 mg twice daily) did not influence the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics (ecg) of digoxin given as a 0.25 mg dose every day.
coadministration of digoxin did not influence the pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam.
warfarin keppra  (1000 mg twice daily) did not influence the pharmacokinetics of r and s warfarin.
coadministration of warfarin did not affect the pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam.
probenecid: probenecid, a renal tubular secretion blocking agent, administered at a dose of 500 mg four times a day, did not change the pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam 1000 mg twice daily.
the effect of keppra  on probenecid was not studied.
additive depressant effect when used with general anesthetics, sedatives, antianxiety drugs, hypnotics, alcohol, and other opiate analgesics.
clinical studies with celecoxib have identified potentially significant interactions with fluconazole and lithium.
experience with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (nsaids) suggests the potential for interactions with furosemide and ace inhibitors.
the effects celecoxib on the pharmacokinetics and/or pharmacodynamics of glyburide, ketoconazole, methotrexate, phenytoin, tolbutamide, and warfarin have been studied in vivo and clinically important interactions have not been found.
ace inhibitors: reports suggest that nsaids may diminish the antihypertensive effect of angiotensin converting enzyme (ace) inhibitors.
this interaction should be given consideration in patients taking celebrex concomitantly with ace-inhibitors.
furosemide: clinical studies, as well as post marketing observations, have shown that nsaids can reduce the natriuretic effect of furosemide and thiazides in some patients.
aspirin: celebrex can be used with low dose aspirin.
however, concomitant administration of aspirin with celebrex may result in an increased rate of gi ulceration or other complications, compared to use of celebrex alone.
because of its lack of platelet effects, celebrex is not a substitute for aspirin for cardiovascular prophylaxis.
fluconazole: concomitant administration of fluconazole at 200 mg qd resulted in a two-fold increase in celecoxib plasma concentration.
this increase is due to the inhibition of celecoxib metabolism via p450 2c9 by fluconazole (see clinical pharmacology - pharmacokinetics: metabolism).
celebrex should be introduced at the lowest recommended dose in patients receiving fluconazole.
lithium: in a study conducted in healthy subjects, mean steady-state lithium plasma levels increased approximately 17% in subjects receiving lithium 450 mg bid with celebrex 200 mg bid as compared to subjects receiving lithium alone.
patients on lithium treatment should be closely monitored when celebrex is introduced or withdrawn.
methotrexate: in an interaction study of rheumatoid arthritis patients taking methotrexate, celebrex did not have a significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of methotrexate.
warfarin: the effect of celecoxib on the anti-coagulant effect of warfarin was studied in a group of healthy subjects receiving daily doses of 2-5 mg of warfarin.
in these subjects, celecoxib did not alter the anticoagulant effect of warfarin as determined by prothrombin time.
however, caution should be used when administering celebrex with warfarin since these patients are at increased risk of bleeding complications.
although the occurrence has not been reported with cefizox, nephrotoxicity has been reported following concomitant administration of other cephalosporins and aminoglycosides.
when ertapenem is co-administered with probenecid (500 mg p.o. every 6 hours), probenecid competes for active tubular secretion and reduces the renal clearance of ertapenem.
based on total ertapenem concentrations, probenecid increased the auc by 25% and reduced the plasma and renal clearances by 20% and 35%, respectively.
because of the small effect on half-life, the coadministration with probenecid to extend the half-life of ertapenem is not recommended.
in vitro studies indicate that ertapenem does not inhibit p-glycoprotein-mediated transport of digoxin or vinblastine and that ertapenem is not a substrate for p-glycoprotein-mediated transport.
hemabate may augment the activity of other oxytocic agents.
neuropathy has occurred more frequently in patients with a history of neuropathy or neurotoxic drug therapy, including stavudine, and these patients may be at increased risk of neuropathy during videx therapy (see adverse reactions).
allopurinol: the auc of didanosine was increased about 4-fold when allopurinol at 300 mg/day was coadministered with a single 200-mg dose of videx to two patients with renal impairment (clcr=15 and 18 ml/min).
the effects of allopurinol on didanosine pharmacokinetics in subjects with normal renal function are not known.
antacids: concomitant administration of antacids containing magnesium or aluminum with videx chewable/dispersible buffered tablets or pediatric powder for oral solution may potentiate adverse events associated with the antacid components.
drugs whose absorption can be affected by the level of acidity in the stomach: drugs such as ketoconazole and itraconazole should be administered at least 2 hours prior to dosing with videx.
ganciclovir: administration of videx 2 hours prior to or concurrent with oral ganciclovir was associated with a 111 (114)% increase in the steady-state auc of didanosine (n = 12).
a 21 (17)% decrease in the steady-state auc of ganciclovir was observed when videx was administered 2 hours prior to ganciclovir, but not when the two drugs were administered simultaneously (n = 12).
quinolone antibiotics: videx should be administered at least 2 hours after or 6 hours before dosing with ciprofloxacin because plasma concentrations of ciprofloxacin are decreased when administered with antacids containing magnesium, calcium, or aluminum.
in eight hiv-infected patients, the steady-state auc of ciprofloxacin was decreased an average of 26% (95% ci = 14%, 37%) when ciprofloxacin was administered 2 hours prior to a marketed chewable/dispersible tablet formulation of videx.
the auc of ciprofloxacin was decreased an average of 15-fold in 12 healthy subjects given ciprofloxacin and didanosine-placebo tablets concurrently.
in a single subject given one dose of ciprofloxacin 2 hours after a dose of didanosine-placebo tablets, a greater than 50% reduction in the auc of ciprofloxacin was observed.
plasma concentrations of quinolone antibiotics are decreased when administered with antacids containing magnesium, calcium, or aluminum.
the optimal dosing interval for coadministration with videx should be determined by consulting the appropriate quinolone package insert.
interactions with other antiretroviral drugs: significant decreases in the auc of delavirdine (20%) and indinavir (84%) occurred following simultaneous administration of these agents with videx.
to avoid this interaction, delavirdine or indinavir should be given 1 hour prior to dosing with videx.
the pharmacokinetics of nelfinavir are not altered to a clinically significant degree when it is administered with a light meal 1 hour after videx.
may interact with the following: cholestyramine, colestipol (use with thiazide diuretics may prevent the diuretic from working properly;
drug-drug interactions: the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic interactions between uroxatral and other alpha-blockers have not been determined.
however, interactions may be expected, and uroxatral should not be used in combination with other alpha-blockers.
an immune response to campath may interfere with subsequent diagnostic serum tests that utilize antibodies
a possible drug interaction of foscavir and intravenous pentamidine has been described.
concomitant treatment of four patients in the united kingdom with foscavir and intravenous pentamidine may have caused hypocalcemia;
because of foscarnets tendency to cause renal impairment, the use of foscavir should be avoided in combination with potentially nephrotoxic drugs such as aminoglycosides, amphotericin b and intravenous pentamidine unless the potential benefits outweigh the risks to the patient.
ganciclovir: the pharmacokinetics of foscarnet and ganciclovir were not altered in 13 patients receiving either concomitant therapy or daily alternating therapy for maintenance of cmv disease.
the use of codeine may result in additive cns depressant effects when coadministered with alcohol, antihistamines, psychotropics or other drugs that produce cns depression.
serious toxicity may result if dextromethorphan is coadministered with monoamine oxidase inhibitors (maois).
the use of dextromethorphan hydrobromide may result in additive cns depressant effects when coadministered with alcohol, antihistamines, psychotropics or other drugs that produce cns depression.
antiacid, clarithromycin, didanosine, fluconazole, fluoxetine, indanavir, ketoconazole, phenytoin, phenobarbitol, carbamazepine, rifabutin, rifampin, ritanovir, saquinavir.
milk, milk products, and calcium-rich foods or drugs may impair the absorption of emcyt.
corticotropin may accentuate the electrolyte loss associated with diuretic therapy.
drug interactions: a. drugs enhancing heparin effect: oral anticoagulants: heparin sodium may prolong the one-stage prothrombin time.
therefore, when heparin sodium is given with dicumarol or warfarin sodium, a period of at least 5 hours after the last intravenous dose or 24 hours after the last subcutaneous dose should elapse before blood is drawn if a valid prothrombin time is to be obtained.
platelet inhibitors: drugs such as acetylsalicylic acid, dextran, phenylbutazone, ibuprofen, indomethacin, dipyridamole, hydroxychloroquine and others that interfere with platelet-aggregation reactions (the main hemostatic defense of heparinized patients) may induce bleeding and should be used with caution in patients receiving heparin sodium.
the anticoagulant effect of heparin is enhanced by concurrent treatment with antithrombin iii (human) in patients with hereditary antithrombin iii deficiency.
thus in order to avoid bleeding, reduced dosage of heparin is recommended during treatment with antithrombin iii (human).
drugs decreasing heparin effect: digitalis, tetracyclines, nicotine, or antihistamines may partially counteract the anticoagulant action of heparin sodium.
heparin sodium injection should not be mixed with doxorubicin, droperidol, ciprofloxacin, or mitoxantrone, since it has been reported that these drugs are incompatible with heparin and a precipitate may form.
concomitant use of calcium supplements and l-lysine may increase calcium absorption
starlix is a potential inhibitor of the cyp2c9 isoenzyme in vivo as indicated by its ability to inhibit the in vitro metabolism of tolbutamide.
glyburide: in a randomized, multiple-dose crossover study, patients with type 2 diabetes were administered 120 mg starlix three times a day before meals for 1 day in combination with glyburide 10 mg daily.
metformin: when starlix 120 mg three times daily before meals was administered in combination with metformin 500 mg three times daily to patients with type 2 diabetes, there were no clinically relevant changes in the pharmacokinetics of either agent.
digoxin: when starlix 120 mg before meals was administered in combination with a single 1-mg dose of digoxin to healthy volunteers, there were no clinically relevant changes in the pharmacokinetics of either agent.
warfarin: when healthy subjects were administered starlix 120 mg three times daily before meals for four days in combination with a single dose of warfarin 30 mg on day 2, there were no alterations in the pharmacokinetics of either agent.
diclofenac: administration of morning and lunch doses of starlix 120 mg in combination with a single 75-mg dose of diclofenac in healthy volunteers resulted in no significant changes to the pharmacokinetics of either agent.
in vitro displacement studies with highly protein-bound drugs such as furosemide, propranolol, captopril, nicardipine, pravastatin, glyburide, warfarin, phenytoin, acetylsalicylic acid, tolbutamide, and metformin showed no influence on the extent of nateglinide protein binding.
similarly, nateglinide had no influence on the serum protein binding of propranolol, glyburide, nicardipine, warfarin, phenytoin, acetylsalicylic acid, and tolbutamide in vitro .
certain drugs, including nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents (nsaids), salicylates, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, and non-selective beta-adrenergic-blocking agents may potentiate the hypoglycemic action of starlix and other oral antidiabetic drugs.
certain drugs including thiazides, corticosteroids, thyroid products, and sympathomimetics may reduce the hypoglycemic action of starlix and other oral antidiabetic drugs.
nabilone should be administered with caution to patients who are taking other psychoactive drugs or cns depressants, including alcohol, barbiturates and narcotic analgesics, or to those with a history of psychiatric disorder (including manic-depressive illness and schizophrenia).
nabilone has been shown to have an additive cns depressant effect when given with either diazepam, secobarbitone sodium, alcohol or codeine.
patients on oral antidiabetic agents receiving velcade treatment may require close monitoring of their blood glucose levels and adjustment of the dose of their antidiabetic medication.
although the pressor activity of desmopressin is very low compared to its antidiuretic activity, large doses of desmopressin tablets should be used with other pressor agents only with careful patient monitoring.
levothyroxine sodium absorption: the following agents may bind and decrease absorption of levothyroxine sodium from the gastrointestinal tract: aluminum hydoxide, cholestyramine resin, colestipol hydrochloride, ferrous sulfate, sodium polystyrene sulfonate, soybean flour (e.g., infant formula), sucralfate.
binding to serum proteins: the following agents may either inhibit levothyroxine sodium binding to serum proteins or alter the concentrations of serum binding proteins: androgens and related anabolic hormones, asparaginase, clofibrate, estrogens and estrogen-containing compounds, 5-fluorouracil, furosemide, glucocorticoids, meclofenamic acid, mefenamic acid, methadone, perphenazine, phenylbutazone, phenytoin, salicylates, tamoxifen.
thyroid physiology: the following agents may alter thyroid hormone or tsh levels, generally by effects on thyroid hormone synthesis, secretion, distribution, metabolism, hormone action, or elimination, or altered tsh secretion: aminoglutethimide, p-aminosalicylic acid, amiodarone, androgens and related anabolic hormones, complex anions (thiocyanate, perchlorate, pertechnetate), antithyroid drugs, b-adrenergic blocking agents, carbamazepine, chloral hydrate, diazepam, dopamine and dopamine agonists, ethionamide, glucocorticoids, heparin, hepatic enzyme inducers, insulin, iodinated cholestographic agents, iodine-containing compounds, levodopa, lovastatin, lithium, 6-mercaptopurine, metoclopramide, mitotane, nitroprusside, phenobarbital, phenytoin, resorcinol, rifampin, somatostatin analogs, sulfonamides, sulfonylureas, thiazide diuretics.
amiodarone: amiodarone therapy alone can cause hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism.
anticoagulants (oral): the hypoprothrombinemic effect of anticoagulants may be potentiated, apparently by increased catabloism of vitamin k-dependent clotting factors.
antidiabetic agents (insulin, sulfonylureas): requirements for insulin or oral antidiabetic agents may be reduced in hypothyroid patients with diabetes mellitus and may subsequently increase with the initiation of thyroid hormone replacement therapy.
b-adrenergic blocking agents: actions of some of beta-blocking agents may be impaired when hypothyroid patients become euthyroid.
cytokines (interferon, interleukin): cytokines have been reported to induce both hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism.
digitalis glycosides: therapeutic effects of digitalis glycosides may be reduced.
ketamine: marked hypertension and tachycardia have been reported in association with concomitant administration of levothyroxine sodium and ketamine.
sodium iodide (123i and 131i), sodium pertechnetate tc99m: uptake of radiolabeled ions may be decreased.
somatrem/somatropin: excessive concurrent use of thyroid hormone may accelerate epiphyseal closure.
untreated hypothyroidism may interfere with the growth response to somatrem or somatropin.
theophylline: theophylline clearance may decrease in hypothyroid patients and return toward normal when a euthyroid state is achieved.
careful observation is required when amantadine is administered concurrently with central nervous system stimulants.
the absorption of lymecycline may be affected by the simultaneous administration of indigestion remedies, iron or zinc supplements.
oral contraceptives may be less effective while you are taking lymecycline.
netilmicin should not be administered concomitantly with potent loop diuretics such as furosemide and ethacrynic acid as the potential for ototoxicity is enhanced by the combination.
no pharmacokinetic drug-drug interaction studies were conducted with persantine  (dipyridamole usp) tablets.
adenosine: dipyridamole has been reported to increase the plasma levels and cardiovascular effects of adenosine.
cholinesterase inhibitors: dipyridamole may counteract the anticholinesterase effect of cholinesterase inhibitors, thereby potentially aggravating myasthenia gravis.
the following drugs have been coadministered with kerlone and have not altered its pharmacokinetics: cimetidine, nifedipine, chlorthalidone, and hydrochlorothiazide.
concomitant administration of kerlone with the oral anticoagulant warfarin has been shown not to potentiate the anticoagulant effect of warfarin.
catecholamine-depleting drugs (e.g., reserpine) may have an additive effect when given with beta-blocking agents.
should it be decided to discontinue therapy in patients receiving beta-blockers and clonidine concurrently, the beta-blocker should be discontinued slowly over several days before the gradual withdrawal of clonidine.
literature reports suggest that oral calcium antagonists may be used in combination with beta-adrenergic blocking agents when heart function is normal, but should be avoided in patients with impaired cardiac function.
hypotension, av conduction disturbances, and left ventricular failure have been reported in some patients receiving beta-adrenergic blocking agents when an oral calcium antagonist was added to the treatment regimen.
hypotension was more likely to occur if the calcium antagonist were a dihydropyridine derivative, e.g., nifedipine, while left ventricular failure and av conduction disturbances, including complete heart block, were more likely to occur with either verapamil or diltiazem.
risk of anaphylactic reaction: although it is known that patients on beta-blockers may be refractory to epinephrine in the treatment of anaphylactic shock, beta-blockers can, in addition, interfere with the modulation of allergic reaction and lead to an increased severity and/or frequency of attacks.
hormonal contraceptives, including oral, injectable, transdermal, and implantable contraceptives: an interaction study demonstrated that co-administration of bosentan and the oral hormonal contraceptive ortho-novum produced average decreases of norethindrone and ethinyl estradiol levels of 14% and 31%, respectively.
therefore, hormonal contraceptives, including oral, injectable, transdermal, and implantable forms, may not be reliable when tracleer is co-administered.
specific interaction studies have demonstrated the following: cyclosporine a: during the first day of concomitant administration, trough concentrations of bosentan were increased by about 30-fold.
steady-state bosentan plasma concentrations were 3- to 4-fold higher than in the absence of cyclosporine a.
the concomitant administration of bosentan and cyclosporine a is contraindicated.
co-administration of bosentan decreased the plasma concentrations of cyclosporine a (a cyp3a4 substrate) by approximately 50%.
tacrolimus: co-administration of tacrolimus and bosentan has not been studied in man.
co-administration of tacrolimus and bosentan resulted in markedly increased plasma concentrations of bosentan in animals.
caution should be exercised if tacrolimus and bosentan are used together.
glyburide: an increased risk of elevated liver aminotransferases was observed in patients receiving concomitant therapy with glyburide.
therefore, the concomitant administration of tracleer and glyburide is contraindicated, and alternative hypoglycemic agents should be considered.
co-administration of bosentan decreased the plasma concentrations of glyburide by approximately 40%.
bosentan is also expected to reduce plasma concentrations of other oral hypoglycemic agents that are predominantly metabolized by cyp2c9 or cyp3a4.
ketoconazole: co-administration of bosentan 125 mg b.i.d. and ketoconazole, a potent cyp3a4 inhibitor, increased the plasma concentrations of bosentan by approximately 2-fold.
no dose adjustment of bosentan is necessary, but increased effects of bosentan should be considered.
simvastatin and other statins: co-administration of bosentan decreased the plasma concentrations of simvastatin (a cyp3a4 substrate), and its active  -hydroxy acid metabolite, by approximately 50%.
bosentan is also expected to reduce plasma concentrations of other statins that have significant metabolism by cyp3a4, such as lovastatin and atorvastatin.
patients using cyp3a4 metabolized statins should have cholesterol levels monitored after tracleer is initiated to see whether the statin dose needs adjustment.
warfarin: co-administration of bosentan 500 mg b.i.d. for 6 days decreased the plasma concentrations of both s-warfarin (a cyp2c9 substrate) and r-warfarin (a cyp3a4 substrate) by 29 and 38%, respectively.
clinical experience with concomitant administration of bosentan and warfarin in patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension did not show clinically relevant changes in inr or warfarin dose (baseline vs. end of the clinical studies), and the need to change the warfarin dose during the trials due to changes in inr or due to adverse events was similar among bosentan- and placebo-treated patients.
digoxin, nimodipine and losartan: bosentan has no significant pharmacokinetic interactions with digoxin and nimodipine, and losartan has no significant effect on plasma levels of bosentan.
special consideration should be given to the administration of ethyol in patients receiving antihypertensive medications or other drugs that could cause or potentiate hypotension.
concomitant treatment with thrombolytics (eg, rt-pa or streptokinase) may: - increase the risk of bleeding complications - considerably enhance the effect of refludan on aptt prolongation
concomitant treatment with coumarin derivatives (vitamin k antagonists) and drugs that affect platelet function may also increase the risk of bleeding.
these would include a variety of preparations which contain androgens, estrogens, progestins, or glucocorticoids.
the gonadotropin levels may be transiently elevated by spironolactone, minimally elevated by levodopa, and suppressed by oral contraceptives and digoxin.
the response to factrel may be blunted by phenothiazines and dopamine antagonists which cause a rise in prolactin.
antacids and kaolin: antacids and kaolin can reduce absorption of chloroquine;
cimetidine: cimetidine can inhibit the metabolism of chloroquine, increasing its plasma level.
ampicillin: in a study of healthy volunteers, chloroquine significantly reduced the bioavailability of ampicillin.
cyclosporin: after introduction of chloroquine (oral form), a sudden increase in serum cyclosporin level has been reported.
therefore, close monitoring of serum cyclosporin level is recommended and, if necessary, chloroquine should be discontinued.
concomitant use with other calcium-containing medicines (including antacids) may cause too much calcium in the blood or urine, which may increase the chance of side effects.
using calcium acetate with digitalis glycosides (heart medicine) may cause hypercalcemia (too much calcium in the blood), which could increase the chance of developing an irregular heartbeat.
isoproterenol hydrochloride injection and epinephrine should not be administered simultaneously because both drugs are direct cardiac stimulants and their combined effects may induce serious arrhythmias.
isuprel should be used with caution, if at all, when potent inhalational anesthetics such as halothane are employed because of potential to sensitize the myocardium to effects of sympathomimetic amines.
antihistamines may enhance the effects of tricyclic antidepressants, barbiturates, alcohol, and other cns depressants.
mao inhibitors prolong and intensify the anticholinergic effects of antihistamines.
sympathomimetic amines may reduce the antihypertensive effects of reserpine, veratrum alkaloids, methyldopa and mecamylamine.
effects of sympathomimetics are increased with mao inhibitors and beta adrenergic blockers.
inomax has been administered with tolazoline, dopamine, dobutamine, steroids, surfactant, and high-frequency ventilation.
although there are no study data to evaluate the possibility, nitric oxide donor compounds, including sodium nitroprusside and nitroglycerin, may have an additive effect with inomax on the risk of developing methemoglobinemia.
chlorprothixene may increase the plasma-level of concomitantly given lithium.
in order to avoid lithium intoxication, lithium plasma levels should be monitored closely.
if chlorprothixene is given concomitantly with opioids, the opioid dose should be reduced (by approx. 50%), because chlorprothixene amplifies the therapeutic actions and side-effects of opioids massively.
avoid the concomitant use of chlorprothixene and tramadol (ultram).
consider additive sedative effects and confusional states to emerge, if chlorprothixene is given with benzodiazepines or barbituates.
exert particular caution in combining chlorprothixene with other anticholinergic drugs (tricyclic antidepressants and antiparkinsonian agents): particularly the elderly may develop delirium, high fever, severe obstipation, even ileus and glaucoma.
both the magnitude and duration of central nervous system and cardiovascular effects may be enhanced when alfenta is administered in combination with other cns depressants such as barbiturates, tranquilizers, opioids, or inhalation general anesthetics.
limited clinical experience indicates that requirements for volatile inhalation anesthetics are reduced by 30 to 50% for the first sixty (60) minutes following alfenta induction the concomitant use of erythromycin with alfenta can significantly inhibit alfenta clearance and may increase the risk of prolonged or delayed respiratory depression.
cimetidine reduces the clearance of alfenta.
therefore smaller alfenta doses will be required with prolonged administration and the duration of action of alfenta my be extended.
- lofexidine may enhance the cns depressive effects of alcohol, barbiturates and other sedatives
- lofexidine may enhance the effects of anti-hypertensive drug therapy
- concomitant use of tricyclic antidepressants may reduce the efficacy of lofexidine.
medications can interfere with folate utilization, including: anticonvulsant medications (such as phenytoin, and primidone) metformin (sometimes prescribed to control blood sugar in type 2 diabetes) sulfasalazine (used to control inflammation associated with crohns disease and ulcerative colitis) triamterene (a diuretic) methotrexate there has been concern about the interaction between vitamin b12 and folic acid.
therefore, intake of supplemental folic acid should not exceed 1000 micrograms ( g, sometimes mcg) per day to prevent folic acid from masking symptoms of vitamin b12 deficiency.
it is important for older adults to be aware of the relationship between folic acid and vitamin b12 because they are at greater risk of having a vitamin b12 deficiency.
in patients receiving a potent cyp3a4 inducer such as rifampicin or phenytoin, a dose increase to 500 mg daily should be considered in the absence of severe adverse drug reaction, and clinical response and adverse events should be carefully monitored (see clinical pharmacology-pharmacokinetics-drug-drug interactions and dosage and administration-dosage adjustment sections).
international normalized ratio (inr) elevations and/or bleeding events have been reported in some patients taking warfarin while on iressa therapy.
substances that are potent inhibitors of cyp3a4 activity (eg, ketoconazole and itraconazole) decrease gefitinib metabolism and increase gefitinib plasma concentrations.
drugs that cause significant sustained elevation in gastric ph (histamine h2-receptor antagonists such as ranitidine or cimetidine) may reduce plasma concentrations of iressa and therefore potentially may reduce efficacy.
phase ii clinical trial data, where iressa and vinorelbine have been used concomitantly, indicate that iressa may exacerbate the neutropenic effect of vinorelbine.
the administration of local anesthetic solutions containing epinephrine or norepinephrine to patients receiving monoamine oxidase inhibitors or tricyclic antidepressants may produce severe, prolonged hypertension.
phenothiazines and butyrophenones may reduce or reverse the pressor effect of epinephrine.
concurrent administration of vasopressor drugs (for the treatment of hypotension related to obstetric blocks) and ergot-type oxytocic drugs may cause severe, persistent hypertension or cerebrovascular accidents.
additive adverse effects resulting from cholinergic blockade may occur when levsin is administered concomitantly with other antimuscarinics, amantadine, haloperidol, phenothiazines, monoamine oxidase (mao) inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants or some antihistamines.
antacids may interfere with the absorption of levsin.
azopt (brinzolamide ophthalmic suspension) 1% contains a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor.
however, in patients treated with oral carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, rare instances of drug interactions have occurred with high-dose salicylate therapy.
therefore, the potential for such drug interaction should be considered in patients receiving azopt (brinzolamide ophthalmic suspension) 1%.
the potential effects of fulvestrant on the fertility of male animals were not studied but in a 6-month toxicology study, male rats treated with intramuscular doses of 15 mg/kg/30 days, 10 mg/rat/30 days, or 10 mg/rat/15 days fulvestrant showed a loss of spermatozoa from the seminiferous tubules, seminiferous tubular atrophy, and degenerative changes in the epididymides.
patients who are applying panretin gel should not concurrently use products that contain deet (n, n-diethyl-m-toluamide), a common component of insect repellent products.
animal toxicology studies showed increased deet toxicity when deet was included as proof of the formulation.
although there was no clinical evidence in the vehicle-controlled studies of drug interactions with systemic antiretroviral agents, including protease inhibitors, macrolide antibiotics, and azole antifungals, the effect of panretin gel on the steady-state concentrations of these drugs is not known.
antacid: the effect of an aluminum hydroxide- and magnesium hydroxide-containing antacid (maalox)* on the pharmacokinetics of capecitabine was investigated in 12 cancer patients.
there was a small increase in plasma concentrations of capecitabine and one metabolite (5-dfcr);
there was no effect on the 3 major metabolites (5-dfur, 5-fu and fbal).
coumarin anticoagulants altered coagulation parameters and/or bleeding have been reported in patients taking capecitabine concomitantly with coumarin-derivative anticoagulants such as warfarin and phenprocoumon.
patients taking coumarin-derivative anticoagulants concomitantly with capecitabine should be monitored regularly for alterations in their coagulation parameters (pt or inr).
leucovorin: the concentration of 5-fluorouracil is increased and its toxicity may be enhanced by leucovorin.
deaths from severe enterocolitis, diarrhea, and dehydration have been reported in elderly patients receiving weekly leucovorin and fluorouracil.
probenecid may decrease renal tubular secretion of cephalosporins when used concurrently, resulting in increased and more prolonged cephalosporin blood levels.
this drug may interact with alcohol or other cns depressants (may potentiate the cns depressant effects of either these medications or antihistamines), anticholinergics or other medications with anticholinergic activity (anticholinergic effects may be potentiated when these medications are used concurrently with antihistamines), and monoamine oxidase (mao) inhibitors (concurrent use with antihistamines may prolong and intensify the anticholinergic and cns depressant effects of antihistamines).
it is possible that the cardiovascular action of other calcium channel blockers could be enhanced by the addition of nimotop .
in europe, nimotop  was observed to occasionally intensify the effect of antihypertensive compounds taken concomitantly by patients suffering from hypertension;
a study in eight healthy volunteers has shown a 50% increase in mean peak nimodipine plasma concentrations and a 90% increase in mean area under the curve, after a one week course of cimetidine at 1,000 mg/day and nimodipine at 90 mg/day.
this effect may be mediated by the known inhibition of hepatic cytochrome p- 450 by cimetidine, which could decrease first pass metabolism of nimodipine.
barbiturates may decrease the effectiveness of oral contraceptives, certain antibiotics, quinidine, theophylline, corticosteroids, anticoagulants, and beta blockers.
caution is advised in patients receiving concomitant high-dose aspirin and carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, as anorexia, tachypnea, lethargy and coma have been rarely reported due to a possible drug interaction.
short-acting beta2-agonists: aerosol bronchodilators of the short-acting adrenergic stimulant type may be used for relief of breakthrough symptoms while using formoterol.
concomitant administration of other sympathomimetic agents may potentiate the undesirable effects of foradil.
monoamine oxidase inhibitors and tricyclic antidepressants: foradil should be administered with extreme caution in patients being treated with monoamine oxidase inhibitors or tricyclic antidepressants because the action of formoterol on the cardiovascular system may be potentiated by these agents.
corticosteroids, methylxanthines and diuretics: concomitant treatment with xanthine derivatives, steroids, or diuretics may potentiate a possible hypokalemic effect of  beta2-agonists.
other drugs:drugs such as quinidine, disopyramide, procainamide, phenothiazines, antihistamines, and tricyclic antidepressants may be associated with qt-interval prolongation and an increased risk of ventricular arrhythmia.
it is important that patients understand how to use foradil  (formoterol fumarate) capsules with the supplied aerolizertm inhalation device and how it should be used in relation to other asthma or copd medications they are taking.
acute symptoms should be treated with a short-acting, inhaled  beta2-agonist such as salbutamol (the physician should provide the patient with such medication and instruct the patient in how it should be used).
foradil should not be used as a substitute for oral or inhaled corticosteroids.
guardians of children who have been prescribed foradil should be alerted to the general concern regarding asthma therapy compliance, especially neglect of anti-inflammatory therapy and overuse of short-acting  beta2-agonists.
interactions for vitamin d analogues (vitamin d2, vitamin d3, calcitriol, and calcidiol): cholestyramine: cholestyramine has been reported to reduce intestinal absorption of fat soluble vitamins;
phenytoin/phenobarbital: the coadministration of phenytoin or phenobarbital will not affect plasma concentrations of vitamin d, but may reduce endogenous plasma levels of calcitriol/ergocalcitriol by accelerating metabolism.
since blood level of calcitriol/ergocalcitriol will be reduced, higher doses of rocaltrol may be necessary if these drugs are administered simultaneously.
thiazides: thiazides are known to induce hypercalcemia by the reduction of calcium excretion in urine.
some reports have shown that the concomitant administration of thiazides with vitamin d causes hypercalcemia.
digitalis: vitamin d dosage must be determined with care in patients undergoing treatment with digitalis, as hypercalcemia in such patients may precipitate cardiac arrhythmias.
ketoconazole: ketoconazole may inhibit both synthetic and catabolic enzymes of vitamin d.
however, in vivo drug interaction studies of ketoconazole with vitamin d have not been investigated.
corticosteroids: a relationship of functional antagonism exists between vitamin d analogues, which promote calcium absorption, and corticosteroids, which inhibit calcium absorption.
vitamin d: the coadministration of any of the vitamin d analogues should be avoided as this could create possible additive effects and hypercalcemia.
calcium supplements: uncontrolled intake of additional calcium-containing preparations should be avoided.
magnesium: magnesium-containing preparations (eg, antacids) may cause hypermagnesemia and should therefore not be taken during therapy with vitamin d by patients on chronic renal dialysis.
effects of other drugs on aliskiren based on in-vitro studies, aliskiren is metabolized by cyp 3a4.
co-administration of lovastatin, atenolol, warfarin, furosemide, digoxin, celecoxib, hydrochlorothiazide, ramipril, valsartan, metformin and amlodipine did not result in clinically significant increases in aliskiren exposure.
co-administration of irbesartan reduced aliskiren cmax up to 50% after multiple dosing.
co-administration of atorvastatin resulted in about a 50% increase in aliskiren cmax and auc after multiple dosing.
ketoconazole: co-administration of 200 mg twice-daily ketoconazole with aliskiren resulted in an approximate 80% increase in plasma levels of aliskiren.
effects of aliskiren on other drugs aliskiren does not inhibit the cyp450 isoenzymes (cyp1a2, 2c8, 2c9, 2c19, 2d6, 2e1, and cyp 3a) or induce cyp 3a4.
co-administration of aliskiren did not significantly affect the pharmacokinetics of lovastatin, digoxin, valsartan, amlodipine, metformin, celecoxib, atenolol, atorvastatin, ramipril or hydrochlorothiazide.
warfarin: the effects of aliskiren on warfarin pharmacokinetics have not been evaluated in a well-controlled clinical trial.
furosemide: when aliskiren was co-administered with furosemide, the auc and cmax of furosemide were reduced by about 30% and 50%, respectively.
dexbrompheniramine can interact with alcohol or other cns depressants (may potentiate the cns depressant effects of either these medications or antihistamines), anticholinergics or other medications with anticholinergic activity (anticholinergic effects may be potentiated when these medications are used concurrently with antihistamines), and monoamine oxidase (mao) inhibitors (concurrent use with antihistamines may prolong and intensify the anticholinergic and cns depressant effects of antihistamines).
concurrent use with probenecid or other drugs significantly eliminated by active renal tubular secretion may result in increased plasma concentrations of penciclovir.
the conversion of 6-deoxy penciclovir to penciclovir is catalyzed by aldehyde oxidase.
probenecid : probenecid is known to interact with the metabolism or renal tubular excretion of many drugs (e.g., acetaminophen, acyclovir, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, aminosalicylic acid, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, bumetanide, clofibrate, methotrexate, famotidine, furosemide, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents, theophylline, and zidovudine).
zidovudine should either be temporarily discontinued or decreased by 50% when coadministered with probenecid on the day of vistide infusion.
nephrotoxic agents : concomitant administration of vistide and agents with nephrotoxic potential [e.g., intravenous aminoglycosides (e.g., tobramycin, gentamicin, and amikacin), amphotericin b, foscarnet, intravenous pentamidine, vancomycin, and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents] is contraindicated.
since colestipol hydrochloride is an anion exchange resin, it may have a strong affinity for anions other than the bile acids.
repeated doses of colestipol hydrochloride given prior to a single dose of propranolol in human trials have been reported to decrease propranolol absorption.
however, in a follow-up study in normal subjects, single-dose administration of colestipol hydrochloride and propranolol and twice-a-day administration for 5 days of both agents did not affect the extent of propranolol absorption, but had a small yet statistically significant effect on its rate of absorption;
therefore, patients on propranolol should be observed when colestid tablets are either added or deleted from a therapeutic regimen.
studies in humans show that the absorption of chlorothiazide as reflected in urinary excretion is markedly decreased even when administered one hour before colestipol hydrochloride.
the absorption of tetracycline, furosemide, penicillin g, hydrochlorothiazide, and gemfibrozil was significantly decreased when given simultaneously with colestipol hydrochloride;
no depressant effect on blood levels in humans was noted when colestipol hydrochloride was administered with any of the following drugs: aspirin, clindamycin, clofibrate, methyldopa, nicotinic acid (niacin), tolbutamide, phenytoin or warfarin.
particular caution should be observed with digitalis preparations since there are conflicting results for the effect of colestipol hydrochloride on the availability of digoxin and digitoxin.
discontinuing colestipol hydrochloride could pose a hazard to health if a potentially toxic drug that is significantly bound to the resin has been titrated to a maintenance level while the patient was taking colestipol hydrochloride.
bile acid binding resins may also interfere with the absorption of oral phosphate supplements and hydrocortisone.
considerable caution should be exercised if peganone is administered concurrently with phenurone (phenacemide) since paranoid symptoms have been reported during therapy with this combination.
a two-way interaction between the hydantoin antiepileptic, phenytoin, and the coumarin anticoagulants has been suggested.
presumably, phenytoin acts as a stimulator of coumarin metabolism and has been reported to cause decreased serum levels of the coumarin anticoagulants and increased prothrombin-proconvertin concentrations.
conversely, the coumarin anticoagulants have been reported to increase the serum levels and prolong the serum half-life of phenytoin by inhibiting its metabolism.
although there is no documentation of such, a similar interaction between ethotoin and the coumarin anticoagulants may occur.
caution is therefore advised when administering peganone to patients receiving coumarin anticoagulants.
if the usual amounts of nondepolarizing relaxants are given, the time for recovery from neuromuscular blockade will be longer in the presence of enflurane than when halothane or nitrous oxide with a balanced technique are used.
dimenhydrinate may decrease emetic response to apomorphine.
few systemic data have been collected on the metabolism of wellbutrin following concomitant administration with other drugs or, alternatively, the effect of concomitant administration of wellbutrin on the metabolism of other drugs.
in vitro studies indicate that bupropion is primarily metabolized to hydroxybupropion by the cyp2b6 isoenzyme.
therefore, the potential exists for a drug interaction between wellbutrin and drugs that affect the cyp2b6 isoenzyme (e.g., orphenadrine and cyclophosphamide).
the threohydrobupropion metabolite of bupropion does not appear to be produced by the cytochrome p450 isoenzymes.
the effects of concomitant administration of cimetidine on the pharmacokinetics of bupropion and its active metabolites were studied in 24 healthy young male volunteers.
following oral administration of two 150-mg sustained-release tablets with and without 800 mg of cimetidine, the pharmacokinetics of bupropion and hydroxybupropion were unaffected.
however, there were 16% and 32% increases in the auc and cmax, respectively, of the combined moieties of threohydrobupropion and erythrohydrobupropion.
while not systematically studied, certain drugs may induce the metabolism of bupropion (e.g., carbamazepine, phenobarbital, phenytoin).
drugs metabolized by cytochrome p450iid6 (cyp2d6): many drugs, including most antidepressants (ssris, many tricyclics), beta-blockers, antiarrhythmics, and antipsychotics are metabolized by the cyp2d6 isoenzyme.
although bupropion is not metabolized by this isoenzyme, bupropion and hydroxybupropion are inhibitors of the cyp2d6 isoenzyme in vitro.
in a study of 15 male subjects (ages 19 to 35 years) who were extensive metabolizers of the cyp2d6 isoenzyme, daily doses of bupropion given as 150 mg twice daily followed by a single dose of 50 mg desipramine increased the cmax, auc, and t1/2 of desipramine by an average of approximately 2-, 5- and 2-fold, respectively.
therefore, co-administration of bupropion with drugs that are metabolized by cyp2d6 isoenzyme including certain antidepressants (e.g., nortriptyline, imipramine, desipramine, paroxetine, fluoxetine, sertraline), antipsychotics (e.g., haloperidol, risperidone, thioridazine), beta-blockers (e.g., metoprolol), and type 1c antiarrhythmics (e.g., propafenone, flecainide), should be approached with caution and should be initiated at the lower end of the dose range of the concomitant medication.
mao inhibitors: studies in animals demonstrate that the acute toxicity of bupropion is enhanced by the mao inhibitor phenelzine .
levodopa and amantadine: limited clinical data suggest a higher incidence of adverse experiences in patients receiving bupropion concurrently with either levodopa or amantadine.
administration of wellbutrin tablets to patients receiving either levodopa or amantadine concurrently should be undertaken with caution, using small initial doses and small gradual dose increases.
drugs that lower seizure threshold: concurrent administration of wellbutrin and agents (e.g., antipsychotics, other antidepressants, theophylline, systemic steroids, etc.) that lower seizure threshold should be undertaken only with extreme caution.
alcohol: in post-marketing experience, there have been rare reports of adverse neuropsychiatric events or reduced alcohol tolerance in patients who were drinking alcohol during treatment with wellbutrin.
the consumption of alcohol during treatment with wellbutrin should be minimized or avoided (also see  a href= bupropz_od.htm#ci contraindications)
auranofin should be avoided by patients with a history of serious reaction to any gold medication, including solganal and myochrysine.
auranofin should not be used together with penicillamine (depen, cuprimine), another arthritis medication.
antacids, sucralfate, metal cations, multivitamins quinolones form chelates with alkaline earth and transition metal cations.
administration of quinolones with antacids containing aluminum, magnesium, or calcium, with sucralfate, with metal cations such as iron, or with multivitamins containing iron or zinc, or with formulations containing divalent and trivalent cations such as videx (didanosine) chewable/buffered tablets or the pediatric powder for oral solution, may substantially interfere with the absorption of quinolones, resulting in systemic concentrations considerably lower than desired.
caffeine theobromine grepafloxacin, like other quinolones, may inhibit the metabolism of caffeine and theobromine.
in some patients, this may lead to reduced clearance, prolongation of plasma half-life, and enhanced effects of caffeine and theobromine.
theophylline: grepafloxacin is a competitive inhibitor of the metabolism of theophylline.
serum theophylline concentrations increase when grepafloxacin is initiated in a patient maintained on theophylline.
when initiating a multi-day course of grepafloxacin in a patient maintained on theophylline, the theophylline maintenance dose should be halved for the period of concurrent use of grepafloxacin and monitoring of serum theophylline concentrations should be initiated as a guide to further dosage adjustments.
warfarin: in subjects receiving warfarin, no significant change in clotting time was observed when grepafloxacin was coadministered.
however, because some quinolones have been reported to enhance the effects of warfarin or its derivatives, prothrombin time or other suitable anticoagulation test should be monitored closely if a quinolone antimicrobial is administered with warfarin or its derivatives.
drugs metabolized by cytochrome p450 enzymes the drug interaction study evaluating the effect of grepafloxacin on theophylline indicates that grepafloxacin inhibits theophylline metabolism, which is mediated by cyp1a2.
substrates, in vitro data suggest similar effects of grepafloxacin in cyp3a4 mediated metabolism and theophylline metabolism.
in addition, other quinolones have been reported to decrease the cyp3a4-mediated metabolism of cyclosporine.
include terfenadine, astemizole, cisapride, midazolam, and triazolam.
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (nsaids): the concomitant administration of a nonsteroidal anti inflammatory drug with a quinolone may increase the risks of cns stimulation and convulsions.
antidiabetic agents: disturbances of blood glucose, including hyperglycemia and hypoglycemia, have been reported in patients treated concomitantly with quinolones and an antidiabetic agent.
animal experience indicates that clorazepate dipotassium prolongs the sleeping time after hexobarbital or after ethyl alcohol, increases the inhibitory effects of chlorpromazine, but does not exhibit monoamine oxidase inhibition.
the actions of the benzodiazepines may be potentiated by barbiturates, narcotics, phenothiazines, monoamine oxidase inhibitors or other antidepressants.
in bioavailability studies with normal subjects, the concurrent administration of antacids at therapeutic levels did not significantly influence the bioavailability of tranxene tablets.
if you are also using a steroid inhaler, take bitolterol first and then wait about 15 minutes before using the steroid inhaler.
this allows bitolterol to open air passages, increasing the effectiveness of the steroid.
potential drug interactions for doxylamine include, increased sedation if doxylamine is combined with other cns depressant drugs.
antihistamines may partially counteract the anticoagulation effects of heparin or warfarin.
doxylamine may enhance the effects of epinephrine.
interactions for vitamin d analogues (vitamin d2, vitamin d3, calcitriol, and calcidiol): cholestyramine: cholestyramine has been reported to reduce intestinal absorption of fat soluble vitamins;
phenytoin/phenobarbital: the coadministration of phenytoin or phenobarbital will not affect plasma concentrations of vitamin d, but may reduce endogenous plasma levels of calcitriol/ergocalcitriol by accelerating metabolism.
since blood level of calcitriol/ergocalcitriol will be reduced, higher doses of rocaltrol may be necessary if these drugs are administered simultaneously.
thiazides: thiazides are known to induce hypercalcemia by the reduction of calcium excretion in urine.
some reports have shown that the concomitant administration of thiazides with vitamin d causes hypercalcemia.
digitalis: vitamin d dosage must be determined with care in patients undergoing treatment with digitalis, as hypercalcemia in such patients may precipitate cardiac arrhythmias.
ketoconazole: ketoconazole may inhibit both synthetic and catabolic enzymes of vitamin d.
however, in vivo drug interaction studies of ketoconazole with vitamin d have not been investigated.
corticosteroids: a relationship of functional antagonism exists between vitamin d analogues, which promote calcium absorption, and corticosteroids, which inhibit calcium absorption.
vitamin d: the coadministration of any of the vitamin d analogues should be avoided as this could create possible additive effects and hypercalcemia.
calcium supplements: uncontrolled intake of additional calcium-containing preparations should be avoided.
magnesium: magnesium-containing preparations (eg, antacids) may cause hypermagnesemia and should therefore not be taken during therapy with vitamin d by patients on chronic renal dialysis.
digoxin: coadministration of digoxin, a p-glycoprotein substrate, with oral conivaptan resulted in a reduction in clearance and an increase in digoxin cmax and auc values.
therefore, if digoxin is administered with vaprisol, the clinician should be alert to the possibility of increases in digoxin levels.
beta-blockers: in controlled clinical studies, adrenergic beta-receptor blockers have been frequently administered concomitantly with nicardipine hcl.
cimetidine: cimetidine increases nicardipine hcl plasma levels.
digoxin: some calcium blockers may increase the concentration of digitalis preparations in the blood.
nicardipine hcl usually does not alter the plasma levels of digoxin, however, serum digoxin levels should be evaluated after concomitant therapy with nicardipine hcl is initiated.
maalox * coadministration of maalox tc had no effect on nicardipine hcl absorption.
cyclosporine: concomitant administration of nicardipine and cyclosporine levels.
plasma concentrations of cyclosporine should therefore be closely monitored, and its dosage reduced accordingly, in patients treated with nicardipine.
when therapeutic concentrations of furosemide, propranolol, dipyridamole, warfarin, quinidine, or naproxen were added to human plasma (in vitro), the plasma protein binding of nicardipine hcl was not altered.
clindamycin has been shown to have neuromuscular blocking properties that may enhance the action of other neuromuscular blocking agents.
antagonism has been demonstrated between clindamycin and erythromycin in vitro.
no significant drug-drug pharmacokinetic interactions have been found in interaction studies with hydrochlorothiazide, digoxin, warfarin, cimetidine and phenobarbital.
rifampin, an inducer of drug metabolism, decreased the concentrations of losartan and its active metabolite.
ketoconazole did not affect the conversion of losartan to the active metabolite after intravenous administration of losartan, and erythromycin had no clinically significant effect after oral administration.
fluconazole, an inhibitor of p450 2c9, decreased active metabolite concentration and increased losartan concentration.
as with other drugs that block angiotensin ii or its effects, concomitant use of potassium-sparing diuretics (e.g., spironolactone, triamterene, amiloride), potassium supplements, or salt substitutes containing potassium may lead to increases in serum potassium.
as with other antihypertensive agents, the antihypertensive effect of losartan may be blunted by the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug indomethacin
administration of doxapram to patients who are receiving sympathomimetic or monoamine oxidase inhibiting drugs may result in an additive pressor effect .
in patients who have received muscle relaxants, doxapram may temporarily mask the residual effects of muscle relaxant drugs.
acidifying agents: gastrointestinal acidifying agents (guanethidine, reserpine, glutamic acid hcl, ascorbic acid, fruit juices, etc.) lower absorption of amphetamines.
urinary acidifying agents (ammonium chloride, sodium acid phosphate, etc.) increase the concentration of the ionized species of the amphetamine molecule, thereby increasing urinary excretion.
adrenergic blockers: adrenergic blockers are inhibited by amphetamines.
alkalinizing agents: gastrointestinal alkalinizing agents (sodium bicarbonate, etc.) increase absorption of amphetamines.
urinary alkalinizing agents (acetazolamide, some thiazides) increase the concentration of the non-ionized species of the amphetamine molecule, thereby decreasing urinary excretion.
antidepressants, tricyclic: amphetamines may enhance the activity of tricyclic or sympathomimetic agents;
d-amphetamine with desipramine or protriptyline and possibly other tricyclics cause striking and sustained increases in the concentration of d-amphetamine in the brain;
mao inhibitors: maoi antidepressants, as well as a metabolite of furazolidone, slow amphetamine metabolism.
antihistamines: amphetamines may counteract the sedative effect of antihistamines.
antihypertensives: amphetamines may antagonize the hypotensive effects of antihypertensives.
chlorpromazine: chlorpromazine blocks dopamine and norepinephrine reuptake, thus inhibiting the central stimulant effects of amphetamines, and can be used to treat amphetamine poisoning.
ethosuximide: amphetamines may delay intestinal absorption of ethosuximide.
haloperidol: haloperidol blocks dopamine and norepinephrine reuptake, thus inhibiting the central stimulant effects of amphetamines.
lithium carbonate: the stimulatory effects of amphetamines may be inhibited by lithium carbonate.
meperidine: amphetamines potentiate the analgesic effect of meperidine.
methenamine therapy: urinary excretion of amphetamines is increased, and efficacy is reduced, by acidifying agents used in methenamine therapy.
norepinephrine: amphetamines enhance the adrenergic effect of norepinephrine.
phenobarbital: amphetamines may delay intestinal absorption of phenobarbital;
phenytoin: amphetamines may delay intestinal absorption of phenytoin;
propoxyphene: in cases of propoxyphene overdosage, amphetamine cns stimulation is potentiated and fatal convulsions can occur.
veratrum alkaloids: amphetamines inhibit the hypotensive effect of veratrum alkaloids.
drug/laboratory test interactions: amphetamines can cause a significant elevation in plasma corticosteroid levels.
aspirin: as with other nsaids, concomitant administration of ponstel and aspirin is not generally recommended because of the potential of increased adverse effects.
methotrexate: nsaids have been reported to competitively inhibit methotrexate accumulation in rabbit kidney slices.
caution should be used when nsaids are administered concomitantly with methotrexate.
ace inhibitors: reports suggest that nsaids may diminish the antihypertensive effect of ace inhibitors.
this interaction should be given consideration in patients taking nsaids concomitantly with ace inhibitors.
furosemide: clinical studies, as well as post-marketing observations, have shown that nsaids can reduce the natriuretic effect of furosemide and thiazides in some patients.
during concomitant therapy of ponstel with furosemide, the patient should be observed closely for signs of renal failure, as well as to assure diuretic efficacy.
lithium: nsaids have produced an elevation of plasma lithium levels and a reduction in renal lithium clearance.
thus, when nsaids and lithium are administered concurrently, subjects should be observed carefully for signs of lithium toxicity.
warfarin: the effects of warfarin and nsaids on gi bleeding are synergistic, such that users of both drugs together have a risk of serious gi bleeding higher than users of either drug alone.
antacids: in a single dose study (n=6), ingestion of an antacid containing 1.7-gram of magnesium hydroxide with 500-mg of mefenamic acid increased the cmax and auc of mefenamic acid by 125% and 36%, respectively.  a number of compounds are inhibitors of cyp2c9 including fluconazole, lovastatin and trimethoprim.
aspirin: concomitant administration of diclofenac and aspirin is not recommended because diclofenac is displaced from its binding sites during the concomitant administration of aspirin, resulting in lower plasma concentrations, peak plasma levels, and auc values.
anticoagulants: while studies have not shown diclofenac to interact with anticoagulants of the warfarin type, caution should be exercised, nonetheless, since interactions have been seen with other nsaids.
because prostaglandins play an important role in hemostasis, and nsaids affect platelet function as well, concurrent therapy with all nsaids, including diclofenac, and warfarin requires close monitoring of patients to be certain that no change in their anticoagulant dosage is required.
digoxin, methotrexate, cyclosporine: diclofenac, like other nsaids, may affect renal prostaglandins and increase the toxicity of certain drugs.
ingestion of diclofenac may increase serum concentrations of digoxin and methotrexate and increase cyclosporine s nephrotoxicity.
patients who begin taking diclofenac or who increase their diclofenac dose or any other nsaid while taking digoxin, methotrexate, or cyclosporine may develop toxicity characteristics for these drugs.
lithium: diclofenac decreases lithium renal clearance and increases lithium plasma levels.
in patients taking diclofenac and lithium concomitantly, lithium toxicity may develop.
oral hypoglycemics: diclofenac does not alter glucose metabolism in normal subjects nor does it alter the effects of oral hypoglycemic agents.
there are rare reports, however, from marketing experiences, of changes in effects of insulin or oral hypoglycemic agents in the presence of diclofenac that necessitated changes in the doses of such agents.
a direct causal relationship has not been established, but physicians should consider the possibility that diclofenac may alter a diabetic patient s response to insulin or oral hypoglycemic agents.
diuretics: diclofenac and other nsaids can inhibit the activity of diuretics.
other drugs: in small groups of patients (7-10/interaction study), the concomitant administration of azathioprine, gold, chloroquine, d-penicillamine, prednisolone, doxycycline, or digitoxin did not significantly affect the peak levels and auc values of diclofenac.
phenobarbital toxicity has been reported to have occurred in a patient on chronic phenobarbital treatment following the initiation of diclofenac therapy.
protein binding in vitro, diclofenac interferes minimally or not at all with the protein binding of salicylic acid (20% decrease in binding), tolbutamide, prednisolone (10% decrease in binding), or warfarin.
benzylpenicillin, ampicillin, oxacillin, chlortetracycline, doxycycline, cephalothin, erythromycin, and sulfamethoxazole have no influence in vitro on the protein binding of diclofenac in human serum.
the concurrent use of two or more drugs with anticholinergic activity--such as an antipsychotic drug (eg, chlorpromazine), an antiparkinsonian drug (eg, trihexyphenidyl), and/or a tricyclic antidepressant (eg, amitriptyline)--commonly results in excessive anticholinergic effects, including dry mouth and associated dental complications, blurred vision, and, in patients exposed to high temperature and humidity, hyperpyrexia.
interactions may also occur with the following: anti-depressants/anti-anxiety drugs, drugs used to treat an overactive thyroid, beta-blockers (e.g., propranolol), sparfloxacin, grepafloxacin, guanethidine, guanadrel, metrizamide, cabergoline, lithium, narcotic pain medication (e.g., codeine), drugs used to aid sleep, drowsiness-causing antihistamines (e.g., diphenhydramine), any other drugs that may make you drowsy.
drug interactions with beta-blockers: concomitant use of fenoldopam with beta-blockers should be avoided.
drug interactions, general: although there have been no formal interaction studies, intravenous fenoldopam has been administered safely with drugs such as digitalis and sublingual nitroglycerin.
there is limited experience with concomitant antihypertensive agents such as alpha-blockers, calcium channel-blockers, ace inhibitors, and diuretics (both thiazide-like and loop).
in a phase i trial using escalating doses of taxol (110-200 mg/m2) and cisplatin (50 or 75 mg/m2) given as sequential infusions, myelosuppression was more profound when taxol was given after cisplatin than with the alternate sequence (ie, taxol before cisplatin).
pharmacokinetic data from these patients demonstrated a decrease in paclitaxel clearance of approximately 33% when taxol was administered following cisplatin.
potential interactions between taxol, a substrate of cyp3a4, and protease inhibitors (ritonavir, saquinavir, indinavir, and nelfinavir), which are substrates and/or inhibitors of cyp3a4, have not been evaluated in clinical trials.
reports in the literature suggest that plasma levels of doxorubicin (and its active metabolite doxorubicinol) may be increased when paclitaxel and doxorubicin are used in combination.
hypersensitivity reactions: patients with a history of severe hypersensitivity reactions to products containing cremophor  el (eg, cyclosporin for injection concentrate and teniposide for injection concentrate) should not be treated with taxol.
in order to avoid the occurrence of severe hypersensitivity reactions, all patients treated with taxol should be premedicated with corticosteroids (such as dexamethasone), diphen-hydramine and h2 antagonists (such as cimetidine or ranitidine).
however, severe reactions, such as hypotension requiring treatment, dyspnea requiring bronchodilators, angioedema, or generalized urticaria require immediate discontinuation of taxol and aggressive symptomatic therapy.
the concurrent use of robinul injection with other anticholinergics or medications with anticholinergic activity, such as phenothiazines, antiparkinson drugs, or tricyclic antidepressants, may intensify the antimuscarinic effects and may result in an increase in anticholinergic side effects.
concomitant administration of robinul injection and potassium chloride in a wax matrix may increase the severity of potassium chloride-induced gastrointestinal lesions as a result of a slower gastrointestinal transit time.
no significant drug interactions have been reported in studies of candesartan cilexetil given with other drugs such as glyburide, nifedipine, digoxin, warfarin, hydrochlorothiazide, and oral contraceptives in healthy volunteers, or given with enalapril to patients with heart failure (nyha class ii and iii).
lithium reversible increases in serum lithium concentrations and toxicity have been reported during concomitant administration of lithium with ace inhibitors, and with some angiotensin ii receptor antagonists.
an increase in serum lithium concentration has been reported during concomitant administration of lithium with atacand, so careful monitoring of serum lithium levels is recommended during concomitant use.
patients receiving other narcotic analgesics, antipsychotics, antianxiety agents, or other cns depressants (including alcohol) concomitantly with hydrocodone and acetaminophen tablets may exhibit an additive cns depression.
the use of mao inhibitors or tricyclic antidepressants with hydrocodone preparations may increase the effect of either the antidepressant or hydrocodone.
the concurrent use of anticholinergics with hydrocodone may produce paralytic ileus.
the risk of myopathy during treatment with drugs of this class is increased with concurrent administration of cyclosporine, fibric acid derivatives, niacin (nicotinic acid), erythromycin, azole antifungals.
antacid: when atorvastatin and maalox tc suspension were coadministered, plasma concentrations of atorvastatin decreased approximately 35%.
antipyrine: because atorvastatin does not affect the pharmacokinetics of antipyrine, interactions with other drugs metabolized via the same cytochrome isozymes are not expected.
colestipol: plasma concentrations of atorvastatin decreased approximately 25% when colestipol and atorvastatin were coadministered.
however, ldl-c reduction was greater when atorvastatin and colestipol were coadministered than when either drug was given alone.
cimetidine: atorvastatin plasma concentrations and ldl-c reduction were not altered by coadministration of cimetidine.
digoxin: when multiple doses of atorvastatin and digoxin were coadministered, steady-state plasma digoxin concentrations increased by approximately 20%.
erythromycin: in healthy individuals, plasma concentrations of atorvastatin increased approximately 40% with coadministration of atorvastatin and erythromycin, a known inhibitor of cytochrome p450 3a4.
oral contraceptives: coadministration of atorvastatin and an oral contraceptive increased auc values for norethindrone and ethinyl estradiol by approximately 30% and 20%.
these increases should be considered when selecting an oral contraceptive for a woman taking atorvastatin.
warfarin: atorvastatin had no clinically significant effect on prothrombin time when administered to patients receiving chronic warfarin treatment.
caution should be exercised if an hmg-coa reductase inhibitor is administered concomitantly with drugs that may decrease the levels or activity of endogenous steroid hormones, such as ketoconazole, spironolactone, and cimetidine.
based on adult data, lower doses of caffeine may be needed following coadministration of drugs which are reported to decrease caffeine elimination (e.g., cimetidine and ketoconazole) and higher caffeine doses may be needed following coadministration of drugs that increase caffeine elimination (e.g., phenobarbital and phenytoin).
caffeine administered concurrently with ketoprofen reduced the urine volume in 4 healthy volunteers.
interconversion between caffeine and theophylline has been reported in preterm neonates.
sulfapyridine may interact with any of the following: - acetaminophen (e.g., tylenol) (with long-term, high-dose use) or
- amiodarone (e.g., cordarone) or
- anabolic steroids (nandrolone [e.g., anabolin], oxandrolone [e.g., anavar], oxymetholone [e.g., anadrol], stanozolol [e.g., winstrol]) or
- carbamazepine (e.g., tegretol) or
- carmustine (e.g., bicnu) or
- chloroquine (e.g., aralen) or
- dantrolene (e.g., dantrium) or
- daunorubicin (e.g., cerubidine) or
- disulfiram (e.g., antabuse) or
- divalproex (e.g., depakote) or
- etretinate (e.g., tegison) or
- hydroxychloroquine (e.g., plaquenil) or
- mercaptopurine (e.g., purinethol) or
- naltrexone (e.g., trexan) (with long-term, high-dose use) or
- oral contraceptives (birth control pills) containing estrogen or
- phenothiazines (acetophenazine [e.g., tindal], chlorpromazine [e.g., thorazine], fluphenazine [e.g., prolixin], mesoridazine [e.g., serentil], perphenazine [e.g., trilafon], prochlorperazine [e.g., compazine], promazine [e.g., sparine], promethazine [e.g., phenergan], thioridazine [e.g., mellaril], trifluoperazine [e.g., stelazine], triflupromazine [e.g., vesprin], trimeprazine [e.g., temaril]) or
- plicamycin (e.g., mithracin) or
- valproic acid (e.g., depakene) use of sulfapyridine with these medicines may increase the chance of side effects affecting the liver
- acetohydroxamic acid (e.g., lithostat) or
- furazolidone (e.g., furoxone) or
- nitrofurantoin (e.g., furadantin) or
- procainamide (e.g., pronestyl) or
- quinidine (e.g., quinidex) or
- quinine (e.g., quinamm) or
- sulfoxone (e.g., diasone) or
- vitamin k (e.g., aquamephyton, synkayvite) use of sulfapyridine with these medicines may increase the chance of side effects affecting the blood
- anticoagulants (blood thinners) or
- ethotoin (e.g., peganone) or
- mephenytoin (e.g., mesantoin) use of sulfapyridine with these medicines may increase the chance of side effects of these medicines
- antidiabetics, oral (diabetes medicine you take by mouth) use of oral antidiabetics with sulfapyridine may increase the chance of side effects affecting the blood and/or the side effects or oral antidiabetics
- methotrexate (e.g., mexate) use of methotrexate with sulfapyridine may increase the chance of side effects affecting the liver and/or the side effects of methotrexate
- methyldopa (e.g., aldomet) use of methyldopa with sulfapyridine may increase the chance of side effects affecting the liver and/or the blood
- phenytoin (e.g., dilantin) use of phenytoin with sulfapyridine may increase the chance of side effects affecting the liver and/or the side effects of phenytoin
anticholinesterases (neostgmine, physostigmine), lignocaine, quinine, procainamide can enhance toxicity and cause cardio respiratory depression.
in addition, neuromuscular blocking action is enhanced by general anesthetics, local anesthetics like lidocaine, procaine, beta-blockers, metaclopramide, lithium carbonate, and terbutaline.
oral anticoagulants caution should be exercised when coumarin anticoagulants are given in conjunction with tricor.
hmg-coa reductase inhibitors: the combined use of tricor and hmg-coa reductase inhibitors should be avoided unless the benefit of further alterations in lipid levels is likely to outweigh the increased risk of this drug combination.
resins: since bile acid sequestrants may bind other drugs given concurrently, patients should take tricor at least 1 hour before or 4-6 hours after a bile acid binding resin to avoid impeding its absorption.
cyclosporine: because cyclosporine can produce nephrotoxicity with decreases in creatinine clearance and rises in serum creatinine, and because renal excretion is the primary elimination route of fibrate drugs including tricor, there is a risk that an interaction will lead to deterioration.
the benefits and risks of using tricor with immunosuppressants and other potentially nephrotoxic agents should be carefully considered, and the lowest effective dose employed
drug-drug interactions in vitro studies using human liver microsomes indicate that fenofibrate and fenofibric acid are not inhibitors of cytochrome (cyp) p450 isoforms cyp3a4, cyp2d6, cyp2e1, or cyp1a2.
therefore, fenofibrate should be taken at least 1 hour before or 4-6 hours after a bile acid binding resin to avoid impeding its absorption .
concomitant administration of fenofibrate (equivalent to 145mg tricor) with pravastatin (40 mg) once daily for 10 days has been shown to increase the mean cmax and auc values for pravastatin by 36% (range from 69% decrease to 321% increase) and 28% (range from 54% decrease to 128% increase), respectively, and for 3 -hydroxy-iso-pravastatin by 55% (range from 32% decrease to 314% increase) and 39% (range from 24% decrease to 261% increase), respectively in 23 healthy adults.
a single dose of pravastatin had no clinically important effect on the pharmacokinetics of fenofibric acid.
concomitant administration of fenofibrate (equivalent to 145 mg tricor) with atorvastatin (20 mg) once daily for 10 days resulted in approximately 17% decrease (range from 67% decrease to 44% increase) in atorvastatin auc values in 22 healthy males.
the atorvastatin cmax values were not significantly affected by fenofibrate.
the pharmacokinetics of fenofibric acid were not significantly affected by atorvastatin
buprenorphine is metabolized to norbuprenorphine by cytochrome cyp 3a4.
because cyp 3a4 inhibitors may increase plasma concentrations of buprenorphine, patients already on cyp 3a4 inhibitors such as azole antifungals (e.g.
ketoconazole), macrolide antibiotics (e.g. erythromycin), and hiv protease inhibitors (e.g. ritonavir, indinavir and saquinavir) should have their dose of subutex or suboxone adjusted.
based on anecdotal reports, there may be an interaction between buprenorphine and benzodiazepines.
there have been a number of reports in the post-marketing experience of coma and death associated with the concomitant intravenous misuse of buprenorphine and benzodiazepines by addicts.
in many of these cases, buprenorphine was misused by self-injection of crushed subutex tablets.
subutex and suboxone should be prescribed with caution to patients on benzodiazepines or other drugs that act on the central nervous system, regardless of whether these drugs are taken on the advice of a physician or are taken as drugs of abuse.
patients should be warned of the potential danger of the intravenous self-administration of benzodiazepines while under treatment with suboxone or subutex.
nephrotoxicity has been reported following concomitant administration of aminoglycoside antibiotics and cephalosporin antibiotics.
concomitant administration of probenecid doubled the auc for cefprozil.
the bioavailability of the capsule formulation of cefprozil was not affected when administered 5 minutes following an antacid.
because dopamine is metabolized by monoamine oxidase (mao), inhibition of this enzyme prolongs and potentiates the effect of dopamine.
patients who have been treated with mao inhibitors within two to three weeks prior to the administration of dopamine hcl should receive initial doses of dopamine hcl no greater than one-tenth (1/10) of the usual dose.
concurrent administration of low-dose dopamine hcl and diuretic agents may produce an additive or potentiating effect on urine flow.
cardiac effects of dopamine are antagonized by beta-adrenergic blocking agents, such as propranolol and metoprolol.
the peripheral vasoconstriction caused by high doses of dopamine hcl is antagonized by alpha-adrenergic blocking agents.
dopamine-induced renal and mesenteric vasodilation is not antagonized by either alpha- or beta-adrenergic blocking agents.
butyrophenones (such as haloperidol) and phenothiazines can suppress the dopaminergic renal and mesenteric vasodilation induced with low dose dopamine infusion.
cyclopropane or halogenated hydrocarbon anesthetics increase cardiac autonomic irritability and may sensitize the myocardium to the action of certain intravenously administered catecholamines, such as dopamine.
therefore, extreme caution should be exercised when administering dopamine hcl to patients receiving cyclopropane or halogenated hydrocarbon anesthetics.
it has been reported that results of studies in animals indicate that dopamine-induced ventricular arrhythmias during anesthesia can be reversed by propranolol.
the concomitant use of vasopressors, vasoconstricting agents (such as ergonovine) and some oxytocic drugs may result in severe hypertension.
administration of phenytoin to patients receiving dopamine hcl has been reported to lead to hypotension and bradycardia.
it is suggested that in patients receiving dopamine hcl, alternatives to phenytoin should be used if anticonvulsant therapy is needed.
loratadine (10 mg once daily) has been coadministered with therapeutic doses of erythromycin, cimetidine, and ketoconazole in controlled clinical pharmacology studies in adult volunteers.
although increased plasma concentrations (auc 0-24 hrs) of loratadine and/or descarboethoxyloratadine were observed following coadministration of loratadine with each of these drugs in normal volunteers (n = 24 in each study), there were no clinically relevant changes in the safety profile of loratadine, as assessed by electrocardiographic parameters, clinical laboratory tests, vital signs, and adverse events.
no effects on plasma concentrations of cimetidine or ketoconazole were observed.
plasma concentrations (auc 0-24 hrs) of erythromycin decreased 15% with coadministration of loratadine relative to that observed with erythromycin alone.
table 1 effects on plasma concentrations (auc 0-24 hrs) of loratadine and descarboethoxyloratadine after 10 days of coadministration (loratadine 10 mg) in normal volunteers
loratadine descarboethoxyloratadine
there does not appear to be an increase in adverse events in subjects who received oral contraceptives and loratadine.
gabapentin is not appreciably metabolized nor does it interfere with the metabolism of commonly coadministered antiepileptic drugs.
phenytoin: in a single (400 mg) and multiple dose (400 mg tid) study of neurontin in epileptic patients (n=8) maintained on phenytoin monotherapy for at least 2 months, gabapentin had no effect on the steady-state trough plasma concentrations of phenytoin and phenytoin had no effect on gabapentin pharmacokinetics.
carbamazepine: steady-state trough plasma carbamazepine and carbamazepine 10, 11 epoxide concentrations were not affected by concomitant gabapentin (400 mg tid;
likewise, gabapentin pharmacokinetics were unaltered by carbamazepine administration.
valproic acid: the mean steady-state trough serum valproic acid concentrations prior to and during concomitant gabapentin administration (400 mg tid;
n=17) were not different and neither were gabapentin pharmacokinetic parameters affected by valproic acid.
phenobarbital: estimates of steady-state pharmacokinetic parameters for phenobarbital or gabapentin (300 mg tid;
naproxen: coadministration (n=18) of naproxen sodium capsules (250 mg) with neurontin (125 mg) appears to increase the amount of gabapentin absorbed by 12% to 15%.
gabapentin had no effect on naproxen pharmacokinetic parameters.
hydrocodone: coadministration of neurontin  (125 to 500 mg;
cmax and auc values are 3% to 4% lower, respectively, after administration of 125 mg neurontin  and 21% to 22% lower, respectively, after administration of 500 mg neurontin .
hydrocodone increases gabapentin auc values by 14%.
morphine: a literature article reported that when a 60-mg controlled-release morphine capsule was administered 2 hours prior to a 600-mg neurontin  capsule (n=12), mean gabapentin auc increased by 44% compared to gabapentin administered without morphine.
morphine pharmacokinetic parameter values were not affected by administration of neurontin  2 hours after morphine.
cimetidine: in the presence of cimetidine at 300 mg qid (n=12) the mean apparent oral clearance of gabapentin fell by 14% and creatinine clearance fell by 10%.
thus cimetidine appeared to alter the renal excretion of both gabapentin and creatinine, an endogenous marker of renal function.
this small decrease in excretion of gabapentin by cimetidine is not expected to be of clinical importance.
the effect of gabapentin on cimetidine was not evaluated.
oral contraceptive: based on auc and half-life, multiple-dose pharmacokinetic profiles of norethindrone and ethinyl estradiol following administration of tablets containing 2.5 mg of norethindrone acetate and 50 mcg of ethinyl estradiol were similar with and without coadministration of gabapentin (400 mg tid;
the cmax of norethindrone was 13% higher when it was coadministered with gabapentin;
antacid (maalox ): maalox reduced the bioavailability of gabapentin (n=16) by about 20%.
this decrease in bioavailability was about 5% when gabapentin was administered 2 hours after maalox.
it is recommended that gabapentin be taken at least 2 hours following maalox administration.
effect of probenecid: probenecid is a blocker of renal tubular secretion.
gabapentin pharmacokinetic parameters without and with probenecid were comparable.
this indicates that gabapentin does not undergo renal tubular secretion by the pathway that is blocked by probenecid.
drug/laboratory tests interactions because false positive readings were reported with the ames n-multistix sg dipstick test for urinary protein when gabapentin was added to other antiepileptic drugs, the more specific sulfosalicylic acid precipitation procedure is recommended to determine the presence of urine protein
both itraconazole and its major metabolite, hydroxyitraconazole, are inhibitors of the cytochrome p450 3a4 enzyme system.
coadministration of terfenadine with itraconazole has led to elevated plasma concentrations of terfenadine, resulting in rare instances of life- threatening cardiac dysrhythmias and one death.
another oral azole antifungal, ketoconazole, inhibits the metabolism of astemizole, resulting in elevated plasma concentrations of astemizole and its active metabolite desmethylastermizole which may prolong qt intervals.
in vitro data suggest that itraconazole, when compared to ketoconazole, has a less pronounced effect on the biotransformation system responsible for the metabolism of astemizole.
based on the chemical resemblance of itraconazole and ketoconazole, coadministration of astemizole with itraconazole is contraindicated.
human pharmacokinetics data indicate that oral ketoconazole potently inhibits the metabolism of cisapride resulting in an eight-fold increase in the mean auc of cisapride.
data suggest that coadministration of oral ketoconazole and cisapride can result in prolongation of the qt interval on the ecg.
in vitro data suggest that itraconazole also markedly inhibits the biotransformation system mainly responsible for the metabolism of cisapride;
therefore concomitant administration of itraconazole with cisapride is contraindicated.
coadministration of itraconazole with oral midazolam or triazolam has resulted in elevated plasma concentrations of the latter two drugs.
coadministration of itraconazole and cyclosporine, tacrolimus or digoxin has led to increased plasma concentrations of the latter three drugs.
cyclosporine, tacrolimus and digoxin concentrations should be monitored at the initiation of itraconazole therapy and frequently thereafter, and the dose of these three drug products adjusted appropriately.
rhabdomyolysis has been observed in patients receiving hmg-coa reductase inhibitors administered alone (at recommended dosages) or concomitantly with immunosuppressive drugs including cyclosporine.
when itraconazole was coadministered with phenytoin, rifampin, or h2antagonists, reduced plasma concentrations of itraconazole were reported.
the physician is advised to monitor the plasma concentrations of itraconazole when any of these drugs is taken concurrently, and to increase the dose of itraconazole if necessary.
although no studies have been conducted, concomitant administration of itraconazole and phenytoin may alter the metabolism of phenytoin;
therefore, plasma concentrations of phenytoin should also be monitored when it is given concurrently with itraconazole.
it has been reported that itraconazole enhances the anticoagulant effect of coumarin-like drugs.
therefore, prothrombin time should be carefully monitored in patients receiving itraconazole and coumarin-like drugs simultaneously.
plasma concentrations of azole antifungal agents are reduced when given concurrently with isoniazid.
itraconazole plasma concentrations should be monitored when itraconazole and isoniazid are coadministered.
severe hypoglycemia has been reported in patients concomitantly receiving azole antifungal agents and oral hypoglycemic agents.
blood glucose concentrations should be carefully monitored when itraconazole and oral hypoglycemic agents are coadministered.
tinnitus and decreased hearing have been reported in patients concomitantly receiving itraconazole and quinidine.
edema has been reported in patients concomitantly receiving itraconazole and dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers.
the results from a study in which eight hiv-infected individuals were treated with zidovudine, 8 +/- 0.4 mg/kg/day, showed that the pharmacokinetics of zidovudine were not affected during concomitant administration of itraconazole, 100 mg b.i.d.
medroxyprogesterone acetate - l-histidine was observed to enhance (in tissue culture) the effect of medroxyprogesterone acetate in reducing the number of human breast cancer cells that were in the s phase.
h1 and h2 blockers - although not reported, l-histidine, via its metabolism to histamine, might decrease the efficacy of h1 and h2 blockers.
although betagan used alone has little or no effect on pupil size, mydriasis resulting from concomitant therapy with betagan and epinephrine may occur.
close observation of the patient is recommended when a beta-blocker is administered to patients receiving catecholamine-depleting drugs such as reserpine, because of possible additive effects and the production of hypotension and/or marked bradycardia, which may produce vertigo, syncope or postural hypotension.
patients receiving beta-adrenergic blocking agents along with either oral or intravenous calcium antagonists should be monitored for possible atrioventricular conduction disturbances, left ventricular failure and hypotension.
the concomitant use of beta-adrenergic blocking agents with digitalis and calcium antagonists may have additive effects on prolonging atrioventricular conduction time.
phenothiazine-related compounds and beta-adrenergic blocking agents may have additive hypotensite effects due to the inhibition of each other s metabolism.
bentiromide may interact with acetaminophen (e.g., tylenol), chloramphenicol (e.g., chloromycetin), local anesthetics (e.g., benzocaine and lidocaine), para-aminobenzoic acid (paba)-containing preparations (e.g., sunscreens and some multivitamins), procainamide (e.g., pronestyl), sulfonamides (sulfa medicines), thiazide diuretics (use of these medicines during the test period will affect the test results), and pancreatic supplements (use of pancreatic supplements may give false test results).
use of cerubidine in a patient who has previously received doxorubicin increases the risk of cardiotoxicity.
cerubidine should not be used in patients who have previously received the recommended maximum cumulative doses of doxorubicin or cerubidine.
cyclophosphamide used concurrently with cerubidine may also result in increased cardiotoxicity.
monoamine oxidase (mao) inhibitors such as isocarboxazid (e.g., marplan), phenelzine (e.g., nardil), procarbazine (e.g., matulane), selegiline (e.g., eldepryl), and tranylcypromine (e.g., parnate): using these medicines with l-tryptophan may increase the chance of side effects.
in vitro studies have shown casodex can displace coumarin anticoagulants, such as warfarin, from their protein-binding sites.
it is recommended that if casodex is started in patients already receiving coumarin anticoagulants, prothrombin times should be closely monitored and adjustment of the anticoagulant dose may be necessary.
intravenous ranitidine was shown to double the bioavailability of oral alendronate.
products containing calcium and other multivalent cations likely will interfere with absorption of alendronate.
potential drug interactions between mentax (butenafine hcl cream) cream, 1%, and other drugs have not been systematically evaluated.
because there is a theoretical basis that these effects may be additive, use of ergotamine-containing or ergot-type medications (like dihydroergotamine or methysergide) and naratriptan within 24 hours is contraindicated.
the administration of naratriptan with other 5-ht1 agonists has not been evaluated in migraine patients.
because their vasospastic effects may be additive, coadministration of naratriptan and other 5-ht1 agonists within 24 hours of each other is not recommended.
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (ssris) (e.g., fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine, sertraline) have been reported, rarely, to cause weakness, hyperreflexia, and incoordination when coadministered with 5-htv agonists.
if concomitant treatment with naratriptan and an ssri is clinically warranted, appropriate observation of the patient is advised.
concurrent use of butorphanol with central nervous system depressants (e.g., alcohol, barbiturates, tranquilizers, and antihistamines) may result in increased central nervous system depressant effects.
when used concurrently with such drugs, the dose of butorphanol should be the smallest effective dose and the frequency of dosing reduced as much as possible when administered concomitantly with drugs that potentiate the action of opioids.
in healthy volunteers, the pharmacokinetics of a 1-mg dose of butorphanol administered as stadol ns were not affected by the coadministration of a single 6-mg subcutaneous dose of sumatriptan.
however, in another study in healthy volunteers, the pharmacokinetics of butorphanol were significantly altered (29% decrease in auc and 38% decrease in cmax) when a 1-mg dose of stadol ns was administered 1 minute after a 20-mg dose of sumatriptan nasal spray.
when the stadol ns was administered 30 minutes after the sumatriptan nasal spray, the auc of butorphanol increased 11% and cmax decreased 18%.
in neither case were the pharmacokinetics of sumatriptan affected by coadministration with stadol ns.
these results suggest that the analgesic effect of stadol ns may be diminished when it is administered shortly after sumatriptan nasal spray, but by 30 minutes any such reduction in effect should be minimal.
the safety of using stadol ns and imitrex (sumatriptan) nasal spray during the same episode of migraine has not been established.
the pharmacokinetics of a 1-mg dose of butorphanol administered as stadol ns were not affected by the coadministration of cimetidine (300 mg qid).
conversely, the administration of stadol ns (1 mg butorphanol qid) did not alter the pharmacokinetics of a 300-mg dose of cimetidine.
it is not known if the effects of butorphanol are altered by concomitant medications that affect hepatic metabolism of drugs (erythromycin, etc.), but physicians should be alert to the possibility that a smaller initial dose and longer intervals between doses may be needed.
the fraction of stadol ns absorbed is unaffected by the concomitant administration of a nasal vasoconstrictor (oxymetazoline), but the rate of absorption is decreased.
therefore, a slower onset can be anticipated if stadol ns is administered concomitantly with, or immediately following, a nasal vasoconstrictor.
no information is available about the use of butorphanol concurrently with mao inhibitors.
digitalis toxicity may be aggravated by the initial release of norepinephrine caused by bretylium tosylate injection.
the pressor effects of catecholamines such as dopamine or norepinephrine are enhanced by bretylium tosylate.
although there is little published information on concomitant administration of lidocaine and bretylium tosylate, these drugs are often administered concurrently without any evidence of interactions resulting in adverse effects or diminished efficacy.
co-administration of nelfinavir at steady-state with a single dose of azithromycin.
co-administration of nelfinavir at steady-state with a single dose of azithromycin (2 x 600 mg tablets) results in increased azithromycin serum concentrations.
although a dose adjustment of azithromycin is not recommended when administered in combination with nelfinavir, close monitoring for known side effects of azithromycin, such as liver enzyme abnormalities and hearing impairment, is warranted.
azithromycin did not affect the prothrombin time response to a single dose of warfarin.
however, prudent medical practice dictates careful monitoring of prothrombin time in all patients treated with azithromycin and warfarin concomitantly.
concurrent use of macrolides and warfarin in clinical practice has been associated with increased anticoagulant effects.
when used in therapeutic doses, azithromycin had a modest effect on the pharmacokinetics of atorvastatin, carbamazepine, cetirizine, didanosine, efavirenz, fluconazole, indinavir, midazolam, rifabutin, sildenafil, theophylline (intravenous and oral), triazolam, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole or zidovudine.
co-administration with efavirenz or fluconazole had a modest effect on the pharmacokinetics of azithromycin.
until further data are developed regarding drug interactions when azithromycin and these drugs are used concomitantly, careful monitoring of patients is advised: digoxin elevated digoxin concentrations.
ergotamine or dihydroergotamine acute ergot toxicity characterized by severe peripheral vasospasm and dysesthesia.
cyclosporine, hexobarbital and phenytoin concentrations.
dexamethasone: steady-state trough concentrations of albendazole sulfoxide were about 56% higher when 8 mg dexamethasone was coadministered with each dose of albendazole (15 mg/kg/day) in eight neurocysticercosis patients.
praziquantel: in the fed state, praziquantel (40 mg/kg) increased mean maximum plasma concentration and area under the curve of albendazole sulfoxide by about 50% in healthy subjects (n=10) compared with a separate group of subjects (n=6) given albendazole alone.
the pharmacokinetics of praziquantel were unchanged following coadministration with albendazole (400 mg).
cimetidine: albendazole sulfoxide concentrations in bile and cystic fluid were increased (about 2-fold) in hydatid cyst patients treated with cimetidine (10 mg/kg/day) (n=7) compared with albendazole (20 mg/kg/day) alone (n=12).
theophylline: the pharmacokinetics of theophylline (aminophylline 5.8 mg/kg infused over 20 minutes) were unchanged following a single oral dose of albendazole (400 mg) in 6 healthy subjects.
nephrotoxicity has been reported following concomitant administration of cephalosporins with aminoglycoside antibiotics or potent diuretics such as furosemide.
renal function should be carefully monitored, especially if higher dosages of the aminoglycosides are to be administered or if therapy is prolonged, because of the potential nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity of aminoglycosidic antibiotics.
chloramphenicol has been shown to be antagonistic to beta-lactam antibiotics, including ceftazidime, based on in vitro studies and time kill curves with enteric gram-negative bacilli.
broad-spectrum antibiotics-broad-spectrum antibiotics may sterilize the bowel and decrease the vitamin k contribution to the body by the intestinal microflora.
cephalosporins-cephalosporins containing side chains of n-methylthiotetrazole (cefmenoxime, cefoperazone, cefotetan, cefamandole, latamoxef) or methylthiadiazole (cefazolin) can cause vitamin k deficiency and hypoprothrombinemia.
cholestyramine-concomitant intake of cholestyramine and vitamin k may reduce the absorption of vitamin k.
colestipol-concomitant intake of colestipol and vitamin k may reduce the absorption of vitamin k.
mineral oil-concomitant intake of mineral oil and vitamin k may reduce the absorption of vitamin k.
orlistat-orlistat may decrease the absorption of vitamin k.
salicylates-salicylates in large doses may inhibit vitamin k epoxide reductase resulting in vitamin k deficiency.
warfarin-vitamin k can antagonize the effect of warfarin
ketoconazole/itraconazole, macrolides, including erythromycin
no dose adjustment is necessary when simulect is added to triple-immunosuppression regimens including cyclosporine, corticosteroids, and either azathioprine or mycophenolate mofetil.
total body clearance of simulect was reduced by an average 22% and 51% when azathioprine and mycophenolate mofetil, respectively, were added to a regimen consisting of cyclosporine, usp (modified) and corticosteroids.
nonetheless, the range of individual simulect clearance values in the presence of azathioprine (12-57 ml/h) or mycophenolate mofetil (7-54 ml/h) did not extend outside the range observed with dual therapy (10-78 ml/h).
the following medications have been administered in clinical trials with simulect with no increase in adverse reactions: atg/alg, azathioprine, corticosteroids, cyclosporine, mycophenolate mofetil, and muromonab-cd3.
interactions attributed to the combined use of baclofen injection and epidural morphine include hypotension and dyspnea.
side effects (kemstro) the most common adverse reaction during treatment with baclofen is transient drowsiness (10-63%).
the adverse experience profile seen with kemstrotm was similar to that seen with baclofen tablets.
talk to your doctor if you are taking certain antibiotics such as erythromycin, clarithromycin or azithromycin.
caution should be exercised when taking this medicine certain antibiotics, such as erythromycin, clarithromycin, or azithromycin.
wait 5 weeks after stopping escitalopram before starting a non-selective mao inhibitor.
wait 2 weeks after stopping an mao inhibitor before starting escitalopram.
tell your doctor if you are taking any of the following drugs: blood thinners (coumadin) other antidepressants metoprolol antihistamines carbamazepine (tegretol) cimetidine (tagamet) estrogens fluoxetine (prozac) intraconazole (sporanox) ketoconazole (nizoral) levodopa lithium muscle relaxants birth control pills sleeping pills thyroid medications
methotrexate: humira has been studied in rheumatoid arthritis patients taking concomitant mtx.
the data do not suggest the need for dose adjustment of either humira or mtx.
anakinra: concurrent administration of anakinra (an interleukin-1 antagonist) and another tnf-blocking agent has been associated with an increased risk of serious infections, an increased risk of neutropenia and no additional benefit compared to these medicinal products alone.
the safety and efficacy of anakinra used in combination with humira has not been studied.
therefore the, combination of anakinra with other tnf-blocking agents, including humira, may also result i n similar toxicities.
steady-state serum concentrations of tricyclic antidepressants are reported to fluctuate significantly when cimetidine is either added or deleted from the drug regimen.
serious anticholinergic symptoms (severe dry mouth, urinary retention, blurred vision) have been associated with elevations in the serum levels of tricyclic antidepressants when cimetidine is added to the drug regimen.
in addition, higher-than expected steady-state serum concentrations of tricyclic antidepressants have been observed when therapy is initiated in patients already taking cimetidine.
in well-controlled patients undergoing concurrent therapy with cimetidine, a decrease in the steady-state serum concentrations of tricyclic antidepressants may occur when cime-tidine therapy is discontinued.
the therapeutic efficacy of tricyclic antidepressants may be compromised in these patients when cimetidine is discontinued.
there have been greater than 2-fold increases in previously stable plasma levels of other antidepressants, including nortriptyline, when fluoxetine hydrochloride has been administered in combination with these agents.
fluoxetine and its active metabolite, norfluoxe-tine, have long half-lives (4 to 16 days for norfluoxetine), that may affect strategies during conversion from one drug to the other.
administration of reserpine during therapy with a tricyclic antidepressant has been shown to produce a  stimulating  effect in some depressed patients.
close supervision and careful adjustment of the dosage are required when nortriptyline hydrochloride is used with other anticholinergic drugs or sympathomimetic drugs.
such individuals are referred to as  poor metabolizers  of drugs such as debrisoquin, dextromethorphan, and the tricyclic antidepressants.
in addition, certain drugs that are metabolized by this isoenzyme, including many antidepressants (tricyclic antidepressants, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, and others), may inhibit the activity of this isoenzyme, and thus may make normal metab-olizers resemble poor metabolizers with regard to concomitant therapy with other drugs metabolized by this enzyme system, leading to drug interactions.
concomitant use of tricyclic antidepressants with other drugs metabolized by cytochrome p450iid6 may require lower doses than usually prescribed for either the tricyclic antidepressant or the other drug.
therefore, co-administration of tricyclic antidepressants with other drugs that are metabolized by this isoenzyme, including other antidepressants, phenothiazines, carbamazepine, and type 1c antiarrhythmics (eg, propafenone, flecainide, and encainide), or that inhibit this enzyme (eg, quinidine), should be approached with caution.
compounds tested in man include warfarin, theophylline, phenytoin, diazepam, aminopyrine and antipyrine.
tetracycline, a bacteriostatic antibiotic, may antagonize the bactercidal effect of penicillin and concurrent use of these drugs should be avoided.
theophylline: in three pharmacokinetic studies including 46 normal, healthy subjects, theophylline clearance and concentration were not significantly altered by the addition of lomefloxacin.
in clinical studies where patients were on chronic theophylline therapy, lomefloxacin had no measurable effect on the mean distribution of theophylline concentrations or the mean estimates of theophylline clearance.
antacids and sucralfate: sucralfate and antacids containing magnesium or aluminum, as well as formulations containing divalent and trivalent cations such as videx  (didanosine), chewable/buffered tablets or the pediatric powder for oral solution can form chelation complexes with lomefloxacin and interfere with its bioavailability.
sucralfate administered 2 hours before lomefloxacin resulted in a slower absorption (mean c max decreased by 30% and mean t max increased by 1 hour) and a lesser extent of absorption (mean auc decreased by approximately 25%).
magnesium- and aluminum-containing antacids, administered concomitantly with lomefloxacin, significantly decreased the bioavailability (48%) of lomefloxacin.
separating the doses of antacid and lomefloxacin minimizes this decrease in bioavailability;
therefore, administration of these agents should precede lomefloxacin dosing by 4 hours or follow lomefloxacin dosing by at least 2 hours.
caffeine: two hundred mg of caffeine (equivalent to 1 to 3 cups of american coffee) was administered to 16 normal, healthy volunteers who had achieved steady-state blood concentrations of lomefloxacin after being dosed at 400 mg qd.
this did not result in any statistically or clinically relevant changes in the pharmacokinetic parameters of either caffeine or its major metabolite, paraxanthine.
other quinolones have demonstrated moderate to marked interference with the metabolism of caffeine, resulting in a reduced clearance, a prolongation of plasma half-life, and an increase in symptoms that accompany high levels of caffeine.
cimetidine: cimetidine has been demonstrated to interfere with the elimination of other quinolones.
the interaction between lomefloxacin and cimetidine has not been studied.
cyclosporine: elevated serum levels of cyclosporine have been reported with concomitant use of cyclosporine with other members of the quinolone class.
interaction between lomefloxacin and cyclosporine has not been studied.
omeprazole: no clinically significant changes in lomefloxacin pharmacokinetics (auc, c max , or t max ) were observed when a single dose of lomefloxacin 400 mg was given after multiple doses of omeprazole (20 mg qd) in 13 healthy volunteers.
phenytoin: no significant differences were observed in mean phenytoin auc, c max , c min or t max (although c max increased by 11%) when extended phenytoin sodium capsules (100 mg tid) were coadministered with lomefloxacin (400 mg qd) for five days in 15 healthy males.
lomefloxacin is unlikely to have a significant effect on phenytoin metabolism.
probenecid: probenecid slows the renal elimination of lome-floxacin.
terfenadine: no clinically significant changes occurred in heart rate or corrected qt intervals, or in terfenadine metabolite or lomefloxacin pharmacokinetics, during concurrent administration of lomefloxacin and terfenadine at steady-state in 28 healthy males.
warfarin: quinolones may enhance the effects of the oral anticoagulant, warfarin, or its derivatives.
however, no clinically or statistically significant differences in prothrombin time ratio or warfarin enantiomer pharmacokinetics were observed in a small study of 7 healthy males who received both warfarin and lomefloxacin under steady-state conditions.
elevated plasma levels of theophylline have been reported with concomitant quinolone use.
there have been reports of theophylline-related side effects in patients on concomitant therapy with norfloxacin and theophylline.
therefore, monitoring of theophylline plasma levels should be considered and dosage of theophylline adjusted as required.
elevated serum levels of cyclosporine have been reported with concomitant use of cyclosporine with norfloxacin.
therefore, cyclosporine serum levels should be monitored and appropriate cyclosporine dosage adjustments made when these drugs are used concomitantly.
quinolones, including norfloxacin, may enhance the effects of oral anticoagulants, including warfarin or its derivatives or similar agents.
the concomitant administration of quinolones including norfloxacin with glyburide (a sulfonylurea agent) has, on rare occasions, resulted in severe hypoglycemia.
diminished urinary excretion of norfloxacin has been reported during the concomitant administration of probenecid and norfloxacin.
the concomitant use of nitrofurantoin is not recommended since nitrofurantoin may antagonize the antibacterial effect of norfloxacin in the urinary tract.
multivitamins, or other products containing iron or zinc, antacids or sucralfate should not be administered concomitantly with, or within 2 hours of, the administration of norfloxacin, because they may interfere with absorption resulting in lower serum and urine levels of norfloxacin.
videx (didanosine) chewable/buffered tablets or the pediatric powder for oral solution should not be administered concomitantly with, or within 2 hours of, the administration of norfloxacin, because these products may interfere with absorption resulting in lower serum and urine levels of norfloxacin.
some quinolones have also been shown to interfere with the metabolism of caffeine.
ethopropazine may interact with alcohol or other cns depressants, causing increased sedative effects.
it may also interact with amantadine or other anticholinergic drugs or maois, which may intensify the anticholinergic action.
ethopropazine can interact with chlorpromazine, increasing the metabolism of chlorpromazine.
because there is a theoretical basis that these effects may be additive, use of ergotamine-containing or ergot-type medications (like dihydroergotamine or methysergide) and axert within 24 hours of each other should be avoided.
monoamine oxidase inhibitors: coadministration of moclobemide resulted in a 27% decrease in almotriptan clearance and an increase in cmax of approximately 6%.
other 5-ht1b/1d agonists concomitant use of other 5-ht1b/1d agonists within 24 hours of treatment with axert is contraindicated.
propanolol: the pharmacokinetics of almotriptan were not affected by coadministration of propranolol.
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (ssris): ssris (e.g., fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine, sertraline) have been rarely reported to cause weakness, hyperreflexia, and incoordination when coadministered with 5-ht1 agonists.
if concomitant treatment with axert and an ssri is clinically warranted, appropriate observation of the patient is advised.
verapamil: coadministration of almotriptan and verapamil resulted in a 24% increase in plasma concentrations of almotriptan.
coadministration of almotriptan and the potent cyp3a4 inhibitor ketoconazole (400 mg q.d. for 3 days) resulted in an approximately 60% increase in the area under the plasma concentration-time curve and maximal plasma concentrations of almotriptan.
although the interaction between almotriptan and other potent cyp3a4 inhibitors (e.g., itraconazole, ritonavir, and erythromycin) has not been studied, increased exposures to almotriptan may be expected when almotriptan is used concomitantly with these medications.
poor metabolizers have higher than expected plasma concentrations of tricyclic antidepressants (tcas) when given usual doses.
cimetidine) and many that are substrates for p450 2d6 (many other antidepressants, phenothiazines, and the type 1c antiarrhythrnics propatenone and flecainide).
while all the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (ssris), e.g., fluoxetine, seriraline, and paroxetine, inhibit p450 2d6, they may vary in the extent of inhibition.
the extent to which ssri-tca interactions may pose clinical problems will depend on the degree of inhibition and the pharmacokinetics of the ssri involved.
nevertheless, caution is indicated in the co-administration of t.a. with any of the ssris and also in switching from one class to the other.
concomitant use of tricyclic antidepressants with drugs that can inhibit cytochrome p450 2d6 may require lower doses than usually prescribed for either the tricyclic antidepressant or the other drug.
it is desirable to monitor tca plasma levels whenever a tca is going to be co-administered with another drug known to be an inhibitor of p450 2d6.
close supervision and careful adjustment of dosage are required when this drug is given concomitantly with anticholinergic or sympathomimetic drugs.
if desipramine hydrochloride is to be combined with other psychotropic agents such as tranquilizers or sedative/hypnotics, careful consideration should be given to the pharmacology of the agents employed since the sedative effects of desipramine and benzodiazepines (e.g., chlordiazepoxide or diazepam) are additive.
both the sedative and anticholinergic effects of the major tranquilizers are also additive to those of desipramine.
concurrent administration of cimetidine and tricyclic antidepressants can produce clinically significant increases in the plasma levels of the tricyclic antidepressants.
conversely, decreases in plasma levels of the tricyclic antidepressants have been reported upon discontinuation of cimetidine which may result in the loss of the therapeutic efficacy of the tricyclic antidepressant 6.
there have been greater than two-fold increases of previously stable plasma levels of tricyclic antidepressants when fluoxetine has been administered in combination with these agents.
the use of nsaids in patients who are receiving ace inhibitors may potentiate renal disease states.
similarly, patients receiving the drug and a hydantoin, sulfonamide or sulfonylurea should be observed for signs of toxicity to these drugs.
concomitant administration of naproxen and aspirin is not recommended because naproxen is displaced from its binding sites during the concomitant administration of aspirin, resulting in lower plasma concentrations and peak plasma levels.
inhibition of renal lithium clearance leading to increases in plasma lithium concentrations has also been reported.
naproxen and other nsaids can reduce the antihypertensive effect of propranolol and other beta-blockers.
probenecid given concurrently increases naproxen anion plasma levels and extends its plasma half-life significantly.
caution should be used if naproxen is administered concomitantly with methotrexate.
naproxen, naproxen sodium and other nsaids have been reported to reduce the tubular secretion of methotrexate in an animal model, possibly increasing the toxicity of methotrexate.
a pharmacokinetic study evaluating the administration of a single dose of inspra 100 mg with ketoconazole 200 mg bid, a potent inhibitor of the cyp3a4 pathway, showed a 1.7-fold increase in cmax of eplerenone and a 5.4-fold increase in auc of eplerenone.
administration of eplerenone with other cyp3a4 inhibitors (e.g., erythromycin 500 mg bid, verapamil 240 mg qd, saquinavir 1200 mg tid, fluconazole 200 mg qd) resulted in increases in cmax of eplerenone ranging from 1.4- to 1.6- fold and auc from 2.0- to 2.9- fold.
ace inhibitors and angiotensin ii receptor antagonists (congestive heart failure post-myocardial infarction)- in ephesus, 3020 (91%) patients receiving inspra 25 to 50 mg also received ace inhibitors or angiotensin ii receptor antagonists (acei/arb).
rates of patients with maximum potassium levels  5.5 meq/l were similar regardless of the use of acei/arb.
ace inhibitors and angiotensin ii receptor antagonists (hypertension)- in clinical studies of patients with hypertension, the addition of inspra 50 to 100 mg to ace inhibitors and angiotensin ii receptor antagonists increased mean serum potassium slightly (about 0.09-0.13 meq/l).
in a study in diabetics with microalbuminuria inspra 200 mg combined with the ace inhibitor enalapril 10 mg increased the frequency of hyperkalemia (serum potassium  5.5 meq/l) from 17% on enalapril alone to 38%.
lithium-a drug interaction study of eplerenone with lithium has not been conducted.
serum lithium levels should be monitored frequently if inspra is administered concomitantly with lithium.
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (nsaids)-a drug interaction study of eplerenone with an nsaid has not been conducted.
the administration of other potassium-sparing antihypertensives with nsaids has been shown to reduce the antihypertensive effect in some patients and result in severe hyperkalemia in patients with impaired renal function.
therefore, when inspra and nsaids are used concomitantly, patients should be observed to determine whether the desired effect on blood pressure is obtained.
caution should be observed when anileridine is coadministered with other opioids, sedatives, phenothiazines, or anesthetics, as these agents may increase respiratory and circulatory depression.
tablet if a patient receiving clonidine hydrochloride is also taking tricyclic antidepressants, the effect of clonidine may be reduced, thus necessitating an increase in dosage.
clonidine hydrochloride may enhance the cns-depressive effects of alcohol, barbiturates or other sedatives.
amitriptyline in combination with clonidine enhances the manifestation of corneal lesions in rats epidural injection clonidine may potentiate the cns-depressive effect of alcohol, barbiturates or other sedating drugs.
narcotic analgesics may potentiate the hypotensive effects of clonidine.
tricyclic antidepressants may antagonize the hypotensive effects of clonidine.
the effects of tricyclic antidepressants on clonidines analgesic actions are not known.
beta blockers may exacerbate the hypertensive response seen with clonidine withdrawl.
also, due to the potential for additive effects such as bradycardia and av block, caution is warranted in patients receiving clonidine with agents known to affect sinus node function or av nodal conduction (e.g., digitalis, calcium channel blockers, and beta-blockers.)
there is one reported case of a patient with acute delirium associated with the simultaneous use of fluphenazine and oral clonidine.
symptoms resolved when clonidine was withdrawn and recurred when the patient was rechallenged with clonidine.
epidural clonidine may prolong the duration of pharmacologic effects of epidural local anesthetics, including both sensory and motor blockade.
this drug may interact with alcohol or other cns depressants (may potentiate the cns depressant effects of either these medications or antihistamines), anticholinergics or other medications with anticholinergic activity (anticholinergic effects may be potentiated when these medications are used concurrently with antihistamines), and monoamine oxidase (mao) inhibitors (concurrent use with antihistamines may prolong and intensify the anticholinergic and cns depressant effects of antihistamines).
the effectiveness of progestin-only pills is reduced by hepatic enzyme-inducing drugs such as the anticonvulsants phenytoin, carbamazepine, and barbiturates, and the antituberculosis drug rifampin.
in two controlled crossover clinical pharmacology studies in healthy male (n=12 in each study) a nd female (n=12 in each study) volunteers, desloratadine 7.5 mg (1.5 times the daily dose) once daily was coadministered with erythromycin 500 mg every 8 hours or ketoconazole 200 mg every 12 hours for 10 days.
in three separate controlled, parallel group clinical pharmacology studies, desloratadine at the clinical dose of 5 mg has been coadministered with azithromycin 500 mg followed by 250 mg once daily for 4 days (n=18) or with fluoxetine 20 mg once daily for 7 days after a 23 day pretreatment period with fluoxetine (n=18) or with cimetidine 600 mg every 12 hours for 14 days (n=18) under steady state conditions to normal healthy male and female volunteers.
although increased plasma concentrations (c max and auc 0-24 hrs) of desloratadine and 3-hydroxydesloratadine were observed , there were no clinically relevant changes in the safety profile of desloratadine, as assessed by electrocardiographic parameters (including the corrected qt interval), clinical laboratory tests, vital signs, and adverse events.
table 1 changes in desloratadine and 3-hydroxydesloratadine pharmacokinetics in healthy male and female volunteers
desloratadine 3-hydroxydesloratadine
certain other antibiotics (aminoglycosides and polymyxin) have also been reported to interfere with the nerve transmission at the neuromuscular junction.
curariform muscle relaxants (eg, tubocurarine) and other drugs, including ether, succinylcholine, gallamine, decamethonium and sodium citrate, potentiate the neuromuscular blocking effect and should be used with extreme caution in patients being treated with coly-mycin m parenteral.
sodium cephalothin may enhance the nephrotoxicity of coly-mycin m parenteral.
the concomitant use of sodium cephalothin and coly-mycin m parenteral should be avoided.
avoid the use of preparations such as decongestants and local anesthetics which contain any sympathomimetic amine (e.g., epinephrine, norepinephrine), since it has been reported that tricyclic antidepressants can potentiate the effects of catecholamines.
imipramine hydrochloride may potentiate the effects of cns depressant drugs.
the plasma concentration of imipramine may increase when the drug is given concomitantly with hepatic enzyme inhibitors (e.g., cimetidine, fluoxetine) and decrease by concomitant administration of hepatic enzyme inducers (e.g., barbiturates, phenytoin), and adjustment of the dosage of imipramine may therefore be necessary.
poor metabolizers have higher than expected plasma concentrations of tricyclic antidepressants (tcas) when given usual doses.
cimetidine) and many that are substrates for p450 2d6 (many other antidepressants, phenothiazines, and the type 1c antiarrhythmics propafenone and flecainide).
while all the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (ssris), e. g., fluoxetine, sertraline, and paroxetine, inhibit p450 2d6, they may vary in the extent of inhibition.
the extent to which ssri-tca interactions may pose clinical problems will depend on the degree of inhibition, and the pharmacokinetics of the ssri involved.
concomitant use of tricyclic antidepressants with drugs that can inhibit cytochrome p450 2d6 may require lower doses than usually prescribed for either the tricyclic antidepressant or the other drug.
it is desirable to monitor tca plasma levels whenever a tca is going to be co-administered with another drug known to be an inhibitor of p450 2d6.
catecholamine-depleting drugs, e.g., reserpine, may have an additive effect when given with beta blocking agents.
patients treated concurrently with brevibloc (esmolol hcl) and a catecholamine depletor should therefore be closely observed for evidence of hypotension or marked bradycardia, which may result in vertigo, syncope, or postural hypotension.
a study of interaction between brevibloc and warfarin showed that concomitant administration of brevibloc and warfarin does not alter warfarin plasma levels.
brevibloc concentrations were equivocally higher when given with warfarin, but this is not likely to be clinically important.
when digoxin and brevibloc were concomitantly administered intravenously to normal volunteers, there was a 10-20% increase in digoxin blood levels at some time points.
digoxin did not affect brevibloc pharmacokinetics.
when intravenous morphine and brevibloc were concomitantly administered in normal subjects, no effect on morphine blood levels was seen, but brevibloc steady-state blood levels were increased by 46% in the presence of morphine.
the effect of brevibloc on the duration of succinylcholine-induced neuromuscular blockade was studied in patients undergoing surgery.
the onset of neuromuscular blockade by succinylcholine was unaffected by brevibloc, but the duration of neuromuscular blockade was prolonged from 5 minutes to 8 minutes.
although the interactions observed in these studies do not appear to be of major clinical importance, brevibloc should be titrated with caution in patients being treated concurrently with digoxin, morphine, succinylcholine or warfarin.
caution should be exercised when considering the use of brevibloc and verapamil in patients with depressed myocardial function.
additionally, brevibloc should not be used to control supraventricular tachycardia in the presence of agents which are vasoconstrictive and inotropic such as dopamine, epinephrine, and norepinephrine because of the danger of blocking cardiac contractility when systemic vascular resistance is high.
sulfacetamide preparations are incompatible with silver preparations.
on the basis of the metabolism of bexarotene by cytochrome p450 3a4, ketoconazole, itraconazole, erythromycin, gemfibrozil, grapefruit juice, and other inhibitors of cytochrome p450 3a4 would be expected to lead to an increase in plasma bexarotene concentrations.
furthermore, rifampin, phenytoin, phenobarbital, and other inducers of cytochrome p450 3a4 may cause a reduction in plasma bexarotene concentrations.
concomitant administration of targretin capsules and gemfibrozil resulted in substantial increases in plasma concentrations of bexarotene, probably at least partially related to cytochrome p450 3a4 inhibition by gemfibrozil.
under similar conditions, bexarotene concentrations were not affected by concomitant atorvastatin administration.
concomitant administration of gemfibrozil with targretin capsules is not recommended.
heparin: since heparin is contraindicated in patients with heparin-induced thrombocytopenia, the co-administration of argatroban and heparin is unlikely for this indication.
however, if argatroban is to be initiated after cessation of heparin therapy, allow sufficient time for heparins effect on the aptt to decrease prior to initiation of argatroban therapy.
aspirin/acetaminophen: pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic drug-drug interactions have not been demonstrated between argatroban and concomitantly administered aspirin (162.5 mg orally given 26 and 2 hours prior to initiation of argatroban 1  g/kg/min. over 4 hours) or acetaminophen (1000 mg orally given 12, 6 and 0 hours prior to, and 6 and 12 hours subsequent to, initiation of argatroban 1.5  g/kg/min. over 18 hours).
oral anticoagulant agents: pharmacokinetic drug-drug interactions between argatroban and warfarin (7.5 mg single oral dose) have not been demonstrated.
however, the concomitant use of argatroban and warfarin (5-7.5 mg initial oral dose followed by 2.5-6 mg/day orally for 6-10 days) results in prolongation of the prothrombin time (pt) and international normalized ratio (inr).
thrombolytic agents: the safety and effectiveness of argatroban with thrombolytic agents have not been established.
co-administration: concomitant use of argatroban with antiplatelet agents, thrombolytics, and other anticoagulants may increase the risk of bleeding.
drug-drug interactions have not been observed between argatroban and digoxin or erythromycin.
isocarboxazid should be administered with caution to patients receiving antabuse (disulfiram, wyeth-ayerst laboratories).
in a single study, rats given high intraperitoneal doses of an mao inhibitor plus disulfiram experienced severe toxicity, including convulsions and death.
concomitant use of isocarboxazid and other psychotropic agents is generally not recommended because of possible potentiating effects.
the monoamine oxidase inhibitory effects of isocarboxazid may persist for a substantial period after discontinuation of the drug, and this should be borne in mind when another drug is prescribed following isocarboxazid.
coadministration of viracept and drugs primarily metabolized by cyp3a (e.g., dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers) may result in increased plasma concentrations of the other drug that could increase or prolong both its therapeutic and adverse effects.
coadministration of viracept and drugs that induce cyp3a may decrease nelfinavir plasma concentrations and reduce its therapeutic effect.
coadministration of viracept and drugs that inhibit cyp3a may increase nelfinavir plasma concentrations.
based on known metabolic profiles, clinically significant drug interactions are not expected between viracept and dapsone, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, clarithromycin, erythromycin, itraconazole or fluconazole.
drugs that should not be coadministered with viracept antiarrhythmics: amiodarone, quinidine antihistamines: astemizole, terfenadine antimigraine: ergot derivatives antimycobacterial agents: rifampin benzodiazepines midazolam, triazolam gi motility agents: cisapride
drugs which require a dose reduction when coadminstered with viracept antimycobacterial agents: rifabutin
* this table is not all inclusive ** viracept may not be effective due to decreased nelfinavir plasma concentrations in patients taking these agents concomitantly
terfenadine: administration of terfenadine with viracept resulted in the appearance of unchanged terfenadine in plasma;
therefore, viracept should not be administered concurrently with terfenadine because of the potential for serious and/or life-threatening cardiac arrhythmias.
because a similar interaction is likely, viracept should also not be administered concurrently with astemizole.
indinavir: coadministration of indinavir with viracept resulted in an 83% increase in nelfinavir plasma auc and a 51% increase in indinavir plasma a.c.
ritonavir: coadministration of ritonavir with viracept resulted in a 152% increase in nelfinavir plasma auc and very little change in ritonavir plasma a.c.
saquinavir: coadministration of saquinavir (using an experimental soft-gelatin capsule formulation of saquinavir 1200mg) with viracept resulted in an 18% increase in nelfinavir plasma auc and a 4-fold increase in saquinavir plasma a.c.
ketoconazole: coadministration of ketoconazole with viracept resulted in a 35% increase in nelfinavir plasma a.c.
this change was not considered clinically significant and no dose adjustment is needed when ketoconazole and viracept are coadministered.
didanosine: it is recommended that didanosine be administered on an empty stomach;
therefore, nelfinavir should be administered (with food) one hour after or more than two hours before didanosine.
a dose adjustment is not needed when zidovudine is administered with viracept.
little or no change in the pharmacokinetics of either drug was observed when viracept was coadministered with lamivudine or stavudine.
rifabutin: coadministration of rifabutin and viracept resulted in a 32% decrease in nelfinavir plasma auc and a 207% increase in rifabutin plasma a.c.
it is recommended that the dose of rifabutin be reduced to one-half the usual dose when administered with viracept.
rifampin: coadministration of rifampin and viracept resulted in an 82% decrease in nelfinavir plasma a.c.
viracept and rifampin should not be coadministered.
ethinyl estradiol and norethindrone: coadministration of viracept with ovcon-35 resulted in a 47% decrease in ethinyl estradiol and an 18% decrease in norethindrone plasma concentrations.
oral anticoagulants: in some normal volunteers, the concomitant administration of diflunisal and warfarin, acenocoumarol, or phenprocoumon resulted in prolongation of prothrombin time.
this may occur because diflunisal competitively displaces coumarins from protein binding sites.
accordingly, when diflunisal is administered with oral anticoagulants, the prothrombin time should be closely monitored during and for several days after concomitant drug administration.
tolbutamide: in diabetic patients receiving diflunisal and tolbutamide, no significant effects were seen on tolbutamide plasma levels or fasting blood glucose.
hydrochlorothiazide: in normal volunteers, concomitant administration of diflunisal and hydrochlorothiazide resulted in significantly increased plasma levels of hydrochlorothiazide.
diflunisal decreased the hyperuricemic effect of hydrochlorothiazide.
furosemide: in normal volunteers, the concomitant administration of diflunisal and furosemide had no effect on the diuretic activity of furosemide.
diflunisal decreased the hyperuricemic effect of furosemide.
antacids: concomitant administration of antacids may reduce plasma levels of diflunisal.
this effect is small with occasional doses of antacids, but may be clinically significant when antacids are used on a continuous schedule.
acetaminophen: in normal volunteers, concomitant administration of diflunisal and acetaminophen resulted in an approximate 50% increase in plasma levels of acetaminophen.
acetaminophen had no effect on plasma levels of diflunisal.
since acetaminophen in high doses has been associated with hepatotoxicity, concomitant administration of diflunisal and acetaminophen should be used cautiously, with careful monitoring of patients.
concomitant administration of diflunisal and acetaminophen in dogs, but not in rats, at approximately 2 times the recommended maximum human therapeutic dose of each (40 to 52 mg/kg/day of diflunisal/acetaminophen) resulted in greater gastrointestinal toxicity than when either drug was administered alone.
methotrexate: caution should be used if diflunisal is administered concomitantly with methotrexate.
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs have been reported to decrease the tubular secretion of methotrexate and to potentiate its toxicity.
cyclosporine: administration of nonsteroial anti-inflammatory drugs concomitantly with cyclosporine has been associated with an increase in cyclosporine-induced toxicity, possibly due to decreased synthesis of renal prostacyclin.
nsaids should be used with caution in patients taking cyclosporine, and renal function should be carefully monitored.
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs: the administration of diflunisal to normal volunteers receiving indomethacin decreased the renal clearance and significantly increased the plasma levels of indomethacin.
in some patients the combined use of indomethacin and diflunisal has been associated with fatal gastrointestinal hemorrhage.
therefore, indomethacin and diflunisal should not be used concomitantly.
the concomitant use of diflunisal tablets and other nsaids is not recommended due to the increased possibility of gastrointestinal toxicity, with little or no increase in efficacy.
aspirin: in normal volunteers, a small decrease in diflunisal levels was observed when multiple doses of diflunisal and aspirin were administered concomitantly.
sulindac: the concomitant administration of diflunisal and sulindac in normal volunteers resulted in lowering of the plasma levels of the active sulindac sulfide metabolite by approximately one-third.
naproxen: the concomitant administration of diflunisal and naproxen in normal volunteers had no effect on the plasma levels of naproxen, but significantly decreased the urinary excretion of naproxen and its glucuronide metabolite.
naproxen had no effect on plasma levels of diflunisal.
non-selective monoamine oxidase (mao) inhibitors - including phenelzine sulfate, tranylcypromine sulfate and pargyline hc1.
concomitant use of l-phenylalanine and non-selective mao inhibitors may cause hypertension.
selegiline - l-phenylalanine and the selective mao inhibitor selegiline may have synergistic antidepressant activity if used concomitantly.
neuroleptic drugs - l-phenylalanine may potentiate the tardive dyskinesia side reactions of neuroleptic drugs if used concomitantly with them.
drug-drug interactions cimetidine: concomitant use of cimetidine is contraindicated.
cimetidine at 400 mg bid (the usual prescription dose) co-administered with tikosyn (500 mcg bid) for 7 days has been shown to increase dofetilide plasma levels by 58%.
cimetidine at doses of 100 mg bid (otc dose) resulted in a 13% increase in dofetilide plasma levels (500 mcg single dose).
if a patient requires tikosyn and anti-ulcer therapy, it is suggested that omeprazole, ranitidine, or antacids (aluminum and magnesium hydroxides) be used as alternatives to cimetidine, as these agents have no effect on the pharmacokinetic profile of tikosyn.
verapamil: concomitant use of verapamil is contraindicated.
co-administration of tikosyn with verapamil resulted in increases in dofetilide peak plasma levels of 42%, although overall exposure to dofetilide was not significantly increased.
in an analysis of the supraventricular arrhythmia and diamond patient populations, the concomitant administration of verapamil with dofetilide was associated with a higher occurrence of torsade de pointes.
ketoconazole: concomitant use of ketoconazole is contraindicated.
ketoconazole at 400 mg daily (the maximum approved prescription dose) co-administered with tikosyn (500 mcg bid) for 7 days has been shown to increase dofetilide cmax by 53% in males and 97% in females, and auc by 41% in males and 69% in females.
trimethoprim alone or in combination with sulfamethoxazole: concomitant use of trimethoprim alone or in combination with sulfamethoxazole is contraindicated.
hydrochlorothiazide (hctz) alone or in combination with triamterene: concomitant use of hctz alone or in combination with triamterene is contraindicated.
hctz 50 mg qd or hctz/triamterene 50/100 mg qd was co-administered with tikosyn (500 mcg bid) for 5 days (following 2 days of diuretic use at half dose).
in patients receiving hctz alone, dofetilide auc increased by 27% and cmax by 21%.
in the diamond trials, 1252 patients were treated with tikosyn and diuretics concomitantly of whom 493 died compared to 508 deaths among the 1248 patients receiving placebo and diuretics.
of the 229 patients who had potassium depleting diuretics added to their concomitant medications in the diamond trials, the patients on tikosyn had a non-significantly reduced relative risk for death of 0.68 (95% ci 0.376, 1.230).
in addition, drugs that are actively secreted via this route (e.g., triamterene, metformin and amiloride) should be co-administered with care as they might increase dofetilide levels.
inhibitors of this isoenzyme (e.g., macrolide antibiotics, azole antifungal agents, protease inhibitors, serotonin reuptake inhibitors, amiodarone, cannabinoids, diltiazem, grapefruit juice, nefazadone, norfloxacin, quinine, zafirlukast) should be cautiously coadministered with tikosyn as they can potentially increase dofetilide levels.
other drug interaction information digoxin: studies in healthy volunteers have shown that tikosyn does not affect the pharmacokinetics of digoxin.
in patients, the concomitant administration of digoxin with dofetilide was associated with a higher occurrence of torsade de pointes.
it is not clear whether this represents an interaction with tikosyn or the presence of more severe structural heart disease in patients on digoxin;
other drugs: in healthy volunteers, amlodipine, phenytoin, glyburide, ranitidine, omeprazole, hormone replacement therapy (a combination of conjugated estrogens and medroxyprogesterone), antacid (aluminum and magnesium hydroxides) and theophylline did not affect the pharmacokinetics of tikosyn.
in addition, studies in healthy volunteers have shown that tikosyn does not affect the pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics of warfarin, or the pharmacokinetics of propranolol (40 mg twice daily), phenytoin, theophylline, or oral contraceptives.
concomitant medications were grouped as ace inhibitors, oral anticoagulants, calcium channel blockers, beta blockers, cardiac glycosides, inducers of cyp3a4, substrates and inhibitors of cyp3a4, substrates and inhibitors of p-glycoprotein, nitrates, sulphonylureas, loop diuretics, potassium sparing diuretics, thiazide diuretics, substrates and inhibitors of tubular organic cation transport, and qtc-prolonging drugs.
the mean clearances of dofetilide were 16% and 15% lower in patients on thiazide diuretics and inhibitors of tubular organic cation transport, respectively.
poor metabolizers of debrisoquin: interactions of carvedilol with strong inhibitors of cyp2d6 (such as quinidine, fluoxetine, paroxetine, and propafenone) have not been studied, but these drugs would be expected to increase blood levels of the r(+) enantiomer of carvedilol .
catecholamine-depleting agents: patients taking both agents with b-blocking properties and a drug that can deplete catecholamines (e.g., reserpine and monoamine oxidase inhibitors) should be observed closely for signs of hypotension and/or severe bradycardia.
clonidine: concomitant administration of clonidine with agents with b-blocking properties may potentiate blood-pressure- and heart-rate-lowering effects.
when concomitant treatment with agents with b-blocking properties and clonidine is to be terminated, the b-blocking agent should be discontinued first.
cyclosporine: modest increases in mean trough cyclosporine concentrations were observed following initiation of carvedilol treatment in 21 renal transplant patients suffering from chronic vascular rejection.
in about 30% of patients, the dose of cyclosporine had to be reduced in order to maintain cyclosporine concentrations within the therapeutic range, while in the remainder no adjustment was needed.
due to wide interindividual variability in the dose adjustment required, it is recommended that cyclosporine concentrations be monitored closely after initiation of carvedilol therapy and that the dose of cyclosporine be adjusted as appropriate.
digoxin: digoxin concentrations are increased by about 15% when digoxin and carvedilol are administered concomitantly.
both digoxin and coreg slow av conduction.
therefore, increased monitoring of digoxin is recommended when initiating, adjusting, or discontinuing coreg.
inducers and inhibitors of hepatic metabolism: rifampin reduced plasma concentrations of carvedilol by about 70%.
calcium channel blockers: isolated cases of conduction disturbance (rarely with hemodynamic compromise) have been observed when coreg is co-administered with diltiazem.
as with other agents with b-blocking properties, if coreg is to be administered orally with calcium channel blockers of the verapamil or diltiazem type, it is recommended that ecg and blood pressure be monitored.
insulin or oral hypoglycemics: agents with b-blocking properties may enhance the blood-sugar-reducing effect of insulin and oral hypoglycemics.
therefore, in patients taking insulin or oral hypoglycemics, regular monitoring of blood glucose is recommended.
other compounds that are substrates of cyp3a4 may have decreased plasma concentrations when coadministered with sustiva (efavirenz).
in vitro studies have demonstrated that efavirenz inhibits 2c9, 2c19, and 3a4 isozymes in the range of observed efavirenz plasma concentrations.
drugs which induce cyp3a4 activity (eg, phenobarbital, rifampin, rifabutin) would be expected to increase the clearance of efavirenz resulting in lowered plasma concentrations.
antihistamines: benzodiazepines gi motility agents anti-migraine antifungal
astemizole midazolam, triazolam cisapride ergot derivatives voriconazole
when coadministered with sustiva in treatment-naive patients, the recommended dose of atazanavir is 300 mg with ritonavir 100 mg and sustiva 600 mg (all once daily).
dosing recommendations for sustiva and atazanavir in treatment-experienced patients have not been established.
in uninfected volunteers, 46% developed rash while receiving sustiva and clarithromycin.
no dose adjustment of sustiva is recommended when given with clarithromycin.
alternatives to clarithromycin, such as azithromycin, should be considered.
other macrolide antibiotics, such as erythromycin, have not been studied in combination with sustiva.
the optimal dose of indinavir, when given in combination with sustiva, is not known.
increasing the indinavir dose to 1000 mg every 8 hours does not compensate for the increased indinavir metabolism due to sustiva.
when indinavir at an increased dose (1000 mg every 8 hours) was given with sustiva (600 mg once daily), the indinavir auc and cmin were decreased on average by 33-46% and 39-57%, respectively, compared to when indinavir (800 mg every 8 hours) was given alone.
lopinavir/ritonavir
a dose increase of lopinavir/ritonavir to 533/133 mg (4 capsules or 6.5 ml) twice daily taken with food is recommended when used in combination with sustiva.
coadministration in hiv-infected individuals with a history of injection drug use resulted in decreased plasma levels of methadone and signs of opiate withdrawal.
plasma concentrations increased by sustiva (efavirenz);
because the potential interaction of efavirenz with oral contraceptives has not been fully characterized, a reliable method of barrier contraception should be used in addition to oral contraceptives.
consider doubling the rifabutin dose in regimens where rifabutin is given 2 or 3 times a week.
monitoring of liver enzymes is recommended when sustiva is used in combination with ritonavir.
should not be used as sole protease inhibitor in combination with sustiva.
anticoagulants: warfarin
anticonvulsants: phenytoin phenobarbital carbamazepine
potential for reduction in anticonvulsant and/or efavirenz plasma levels;
antifungals: itraconazole ketoconazole
drug interaction studies with sustiva and these imidazole and triazole antifungals have not been conducted.
sustiva has the potential to decrease plasma concentrations of itraconazole and ketoconazole.
anti-hiv protease inhibitors: saquinavir/ritonavir combination
expected to substantially decrease plasma levels of efavirenz;has not been studied in combination with sustiva.
other drugs: based on the results of drug interaction studies, no dosage adjustment is recommended when sustiva (efavirenz) is given with the following: aluminum/magnesium hydroxide antacids, azithromycin, cetirizine, famotidine, fluconazole, lamivudine, lorazepam, nelfinavir, paroxetine, and zidovudine.
specific drug interaction studies have not been performed with sustiva and nrtis other than lamivudine and zidovudine.
clinically significant interactions would not be expected since the nrtis are metabolized via a different route than efavirenz and would be unlikely to compete for the same metabolic enzymes and elimination pathways.
alcohol (increases bioavailability by 50%), cimetidine, and valproates.
- alcohol, barbiturates, or narcotics: potentiation of otthostatic hypotension may occur
- antidiabetic drugs: (oral agents and insulin) dosage adjustment of the antidiabetic drug may be required
- cholestyramine and colestipol resins: cholestytamine and colestipol resins have the potential of binding thiazide diuretics and reducing diuretic absorption from the gastrointestinal tract
- corticosteroids, acth: intensified electrolyte depletion, particularly hypokalemia
- skeletal muscle relaxants, nondepolarizing (e.g., tubocurarine): possible increased responsiveness to the muscle relaxant
- lithium: generally should not be given with diuretics.
diuretic agents reduce the renal clearance of lithium and add a high risk of lithium toxicity.
refer to the package insert for lithium preparations before use of such preparations with chlorothiazide
- non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs: in some patients, the administration of a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agent can reduce the diuretic, natriuretic, and antihypertensive effects of loop, potassium-sparing and thiazide diuretics.
therefore, when chlorothiazide and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents are used concomitantly, the patient should be observed closely to determine if the desired effect of the diuretic is obtained
known drug interactions include barbiturates, tranquilizers, and alcohol.
diphenoxylate hcl and atropine sulfate may interact with mao inhibitors in studies with male rats, diphenoxylate hydrochloride was found to inhibit the hepatic microsomal enzyme system at a dose of 2 mg/kg/day.
interaction with central nervous system depressants other than benzodiazepines has not been specifically studied;
however, no deleterious interactions were seen when romazicon was administered after narcotics, inhalational anesthetics, muscle relaxants and muscle relaxant antagonists administered in conjunction with sedation or anesthesia.
particular caution is necessary when using romazicon in cases of mixed drug overdosage since the toxic effects (such as convulsions and cardiac dysrhythmias) of other drugs taken in overdose (especially cyclic antidepressants) may emerge with the reversal of the benzodiazepine effect by flumazenil.
although romazicon exerts a slight intrinsic anticonvulsant effect, its abrupt suppression of the protective effect of a benzodiazepine agonist can give rise to convulsions in epileptic patients.
romazicon blocks the central effects of benzodiazepines by competitive interaction at the receptor level.
the effects of nonbenzodiazepine agonists at benzodiazepine receptors, such as zopiclone, triazolopyridazines and others, are also blocked by romazicon.
the pharmacokinetics of benzodiazepines are unaltered in the presence of flumazenil and vice versa.
there is no pharmacokinetic interaction between ethanol and flumazenil.
use in ambulatory patients the effects of romazicon may wear off before a long-acting benzodiazepine is completely cleared from the body.
an adequate period of observation must be provided for any patient in whom either long-acting benzodiazepines (such as diazepam) or large doses of short-acting benzodiazepines (such as  10 mg of midazolam) have been used.
because of the increased risk of adverse reactions in patients who have been taking benzodiazepines on a regular basis, it is particularly important that physicians query patients or their guardians carefully about benzodiazepine, alcohol and sedative use as part of the history prior to any procedure in which the use of romazicon is planned.
benzthiazide may interact with alcohol, blood thinners, decongestant drugs (allergy, cold, and sinus medicines), diabetic drugs, lithium, norepinephrine, nsaids like aleve or ibuprofen, and high blood pressure medications.
the cns effects of butalbital may be enhanced by monoamine oxidase (mao) inhibitors.
butalbital, acetaminophen and caffeine may enhance the effects of: other narcotic analgesics, alcohol, general anesthetics, tranquilizers such as chlordiazepoxide, sedative-hypnotics, or other cns depressants, causing increased cns depression.
corticotropin may accentuate the electrolyte loss associated with diuretic therapy.
beta-adrenergic blocking agents: experience in over 1400 patients in a non-comparative clinical trial has shown that concomitant administration of nifedipine and beta-blocking agents is usually well tolerated, but there have been occasional literature reports suggesting that the combination may increase the likelihood of congestive heart failure, severe hypotension or exacerbation of angina.
long acting nitrates: nifedipine may be safely co-administered with nitrates, but there have been no controlled studies to evaluate the antianginal effectiveness of this combination.
digitalis: immediate release capsules: since there have been isolated reports of patients with elevated digoxin levels, and there is a possible interaction between digoxin and nifedipine, it is recommended that digoxin levels be monitored when initiating, adjusting, and discontinuing nifedipine to avoid possible over- or under-digitalization.
extended release tablets: administration of nifedipine with digoxin increased digoxin levels in 9 of 12 normal volunteers.
since there have been isolated reports of patients with elevated digoxin levels, it is recommended that digoxin levels be monitored when initiating, adjusting, and discontinuing nifedipine to avoid possible over- or under-digitalization.
quinidine: immediate release capsules: there have been rare reports of an interaction between quinidine and nifedipine (with a decreased plasma level of quinidine).
coumarin anticoagulants: there have been rare reports of increased prothrombin time in patients taking coumarin anticoagulants to whom nifedipine was administered.
cimetidine: a study in 6 healthy volunteers has shown a significant increase in peak nifedipine plasma levels (80%) and area-under-the-curve (74%) after a 1 week course of cimetidine at 1000 mg per day and nifedipine at 40 mg per day.
the effect may be mediated by the known inhibition of cimetidine on hepatic cytochrome p-450, the enzyme system probably responsible for the first-pass metabolism of nifedipine.
if nifedipine therapy is initiated in a patient currently receiving cimetidine, cautious titration is advised.
acetaminophen: may increase plasma concentration of synthetic estrogens, possibly by inhibiting conjugation.
combination hormonal contraceptives may also decrease the plasma concentration of acetaminophen.
acitretin: interferes with the contraceptive effect of microdosed progestin-containing minipill preparations.
aminoglutethimide: may increase cyp metabolism of progestins leading to possible decrease in contraceptive effectiveness.
antibiotics (ampicillin, tetracycline): pregnancy has been reported following concomitant use, however, pharmacokinetic studies have not shown consistent effects with these antibiotics on plasma concentrations of synthetic steroids.
anticoagulants: combination hormonal contraceptives may increase or decrease the effects of coumarin derivatives.
anticonvulsants (carbamazepine, felbamate, phenobarbital, phenytoin, topiramate): increase the metabolism of ethinyl estradiol and/or some progestins, leading to possible decrease in contraceptive effectiveness.
ascorbic acid: doses of ascorbic acid (vitamin c) 1 g/day have been reported to increase plasma concentration of synthetic estrogens by ~47%, possibly by inhibiting conjugation;
atorvastatin: atorvastatin increases the auc for norethindrone and ethinyl estradiol.
benzodiazepines: combination hormonal contraceptives may decrease the clearance of some benzodiazepines (alprazolam, chlordiazepoxide, diazepam) and increase the clearance of others (lorazepam, oxazepam, temazepam).
clofibric acid: combination hormonal contraceptives may increase the clearance of clofibric acid.
cyclosporine: combination hormonal contraceptives may inhibit the metabolism of cyclosporine, leading to increased plasma concentrations;
example inducers include aminoglutethimide, carbamazepine, nafcillin, nevirapine, phenobarbital, phenytoin, and rifamycins.
griseofulvin: griseofulvin may induce the metabolism of combination hormonal contraceptives causing menstrual changes;
morphine: combination hormonal contraceptives may increase the clearance of morphine.
non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (nnrtis): nevirapine may decrease plasma levels of combination hormonal contraceptives;
prednisolone: ethinyl estradiol may inhibit the metabolism of prednisolone, leading to increased plasma concentrations.
protease inhibitors: amprenavir, lopinavir, nelfinavir, and ritonavir have been shown to decrease plasma levels of combination hormonal contraceptives;
indinavir has been shown to increase plasma levels of combination hormonal contraceptives.
rifampin: rifampin increases the metabolism of ethinyl estradiol and some progestins (norethindrone) resulting in decreased contraceptive effectiveness and increased menstrual irregularities.
salicylic acid: combination hormonal contraceptives may increase the clearance of salicylic acid.
selegiline: combination hormonal contraceptives may increase the serum concentration of selegiline.
theophylline: ethinyl estradiol may inhibit the metabolism of theophylline, leading to increased plasma concentrations.
tricyclic antidepressants (amitriptyline, imipramine, nortriptyline): metabolism may be inhibited by combination hormonal contraceptives, increasing plasma levels of antidepressant;
ethanol / nutrition / herb interactions: food: cns effects of caffeine may be enhanced if combination hormonal contraceptives are used concurrently with caffeine.
grapefruit juice increases ethinyl estradiol concentrations and would be expected to increase progesterone serum levels as well;
concomitant oral administration of ketoconazole (a known inhibitor of cyp3a4 activity in the liver and in the intestinal mucosa) caused an eight-fold increase of the systemic exposure to oral budesonide.
if treatment with inhibitors of cyp3a4 activity (such as ketoconazole, intraconazole, ritonavir, indinavir, saquinavir, erythromycin, etc.) is indicated, reduction of the budesonide dose should be considered.
the administration of local anesthetic solutions containing epinephrine or norepinephrine to patients receiving monoamine oxidase inhibitors or tricyclic antidepressants may produce severe, prolonged hypertension.
concurrent administration of vasopressor drugs and of ergot-type oxytocic drugs may cause severe, persistent hypertension or cerebrovascular accidents.
phenothiazines and butyrophenones may reduce or reverse the pressor effect of epinephrine.
cyclosporine - l-arginine may counteract the antinaturetic effect of cyclosporin.
ibuprofen - l-arginine may increase the absorption of ibuprofen if taken concomitantly.
organic nitrates - l-arginine supplements theoretically may potentiate the effects of organic nitrates if taken concomitantly.
sildenafil citrate - theoretically, l-arginine supplements taken concomitantly with sildenafil citrate, may potentiate the effects of the drug.
the concurrent administration of allopurinol and ampicillin increases substantially the incidence of rashes in patients receiving both drugs as compared to patients receiving ampicillin alone.
it is not known whether this potentiation of ampicillin rashes is due to allopurinol or the hyperuricemia present in these patients.
in controlled clinical trials of augmentin xr, 22 patients received concomitant allopurinol and augmentin xr.
however, this sample size is too small to allow for any conclusions to be drawn regarding the risk of rashes with concomitant augmentin xr and allopurinol use.
in common with other broad-spectrum antibiotics, augmentin xr may reduce the efficacy of oral contraceptives
lincomycin has been shown to have neuromuscular blocking properties that may enhance the action of other neuromuscular blocking agents.
antagonism between lincomycin and erythromycin in vitro has been demonstrated.
drug-drug interactions albuterol - strattera should be administered with caution to patients being treated with systemically-administered (oral or intravenous) albuterol (or other beta2 agonists) because the action of albuterol on the cardiovascular system can be potentiated resulting in increases in heart rate and blood pressure.
cyp2d6 inhibitors - atomoxetine is primarily metabolized by the cyp2d6 pathway to 4-hydroxyatomoxetine.
dosage adjustment of strattera may be necessary when coadministered with cyp2d6 inhibitors, e.g., paroxetine, fluoxetine, and quinidine.
in em individuals treated with paroxetine or fluoxetine, the auc of atomoxetine is approximately 6- to 8-fold and css,max is about 3- to 4-fold greater than atomoxetine alone.
an encephalopathic syndrome (characterized by weakness, lethargy, fever, tremulousness and confusion, extrapyramidal symptoms, leukocytosis, elevated serum enzymes, bun, and fbs) followed by irreversible brain damage has occurred in a few patients treated with lithium plus haldol.
a causal relationship between these events and the concomitant administration of lithium and haldol has not been established;
as with other antipsychotic agents, it should be noted that haldol may be capable of potentiating cns depressants such as anesthetics, opiates, and alcohol.
in a study of 12 schizophrenic patients coadministered oral haloperidol and rifampin, plasma haloperidol levels were decreased by a mean of 70% and mean scores on the brief psychiatric rating scale were increased from baseline.
in 5 other schizophrenic patients treated with oral haloperidol and rifampin, discontinuation of rifampin produced a mean 3.3-fold increase in haloperidol concentrations.
thus, careful monitoring of clinical status is warranted when rifampin is administered or discontinued in haloperidol-treated patients.
the concomitant administration of exjade and aluminum-containing antacid preparations has not been formally studied.
although deferasirox has a lower affinity for aluminum than for iron, exjade should not be taken with aluminum-containing antacid preparations.
in healthy volunteers, exjade had no effect on the pharmacokinetics of digoxin.
the effect of digoxin on exjade pharmacokinetics has not been studied.
the concomitant administration of exjade and vitamin c has not been formally studied.
the interaction of exjade with hydroxyurea has not been formally studied.
no inhibition of deferasirox metabolism by hydroxyurea is expected based on the results of an in vitro study.
tissue culture and animal studies indicate that elspar can diminish or abolish the effect of methotrexate on malignant cells.14 this effect on methotrexate activity persists as long as plasma asparagine levels are suppressed.
these results would seem to dictate against the clinical use of methotrexate with elspar, or during the period following elspar therapy when plasma asparagine levels are below normal.
the potential for drug interactions with emtriva has been studied in combination with indinavir, stavudine, famciclovir, and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate.
drug/laboratorytest interactions dactinomycin may interfere with bioassay procedures for the determination of antibacterial drug levels.
caution should be exercised when administering nabumetone with warfarin since interactions have been seen with other nsaids.
concomitant administration of an aluminum-containing antacid had no significant effect in the bioavailability of 6mna.
no interactions have been observed between nizatidine and theophylline, chlordiazepoxide, lorazepam, lidocaine, phenytoin, and warfarin.
in patients given very high doses (3900 mg) of aspirin daily, increases in serum salicylate levels were seen when nizatidine, 150 mg b.i.d., was administered concurrently.
the duration of the period following treatment with amevive  before one should consider starting other immunosuppressive therapy has not been evaluated.
since the effect of amevive on pregnancy and fetal development, including immune system development, is not known, health care providers are encouraged to enroll patients currently taking amevive who become pregnant into the biogen pregnancy registry by calling 1-866-amevive (1-866-263-8483).
since pletal is extensively metabolized by cytochrome p-450 isoenzymes, caution should be exercised when pletal is coadministered with inhibitors of c.p.a. such as ketoconazole and erythromycin or inhibitors of cyp2c19 such as omeprazole.
pharmacokinetic studies have demonstrated that omeprazole and erythromycin significantly increased the systemic exposure of cilostazol and/or its major metabolites.
population pharmacokinetic studies showed higher concentrations of cilostazol among patients concurrently treated with diltiazem, an inhibitor of c.p.a..
pletal does not, however, appear to cause increased blood levels of drugs metabolized by cyp3a4, as it had no effect on lovastatin, a drug with metabolism very sensitive to c.p.a. inhibition.
compounds that have been tested in man include antipyrine, digoxin, propranolol, theophylline, and warfarin and no clinically meaningful interactions were found.
other concomitant therapy although specific interaction studies were not performed, finasteride doses of 1 mg or more were concomitantly used in clinical studies with acetaminophen, acetylsalicylic acid, a-blockers, analgesics, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) inhibitors, anticonvulsants, benzodiazepines, beta blockers, calcium-channel blockers, cardiac nitrates, diuretics, h2 antagonists, hmg-coa reductase inhibitors, prostaglandin synthetase inhibitors (also referred to as nsaids), and quinolone anti-infectives without evidence of clinically significant adverse interactions.
in clinical studies with propecia (finasteride, 1 mg) in men 18-41 years of age, the mean value of serum prostate-specific antigen (psa) decreased from 0.7 ng/ml at baseline to 0.5 ng/ml at month 12.
further, in clinical studies with proscar (finasteride, 5 mg) when used in older men who have benign prostatic hyperplasia (bph), psa levels are decreased by approximately 50%.
other cns depressant drugs (e.g. barbiturates, tranquilizers, opioids and general anesthetics) have additive or potentiating effects with inapsine.
following the administration of inapsine, the dose of other cns depressant drugs should be reduced.
however, the systemic administration of some quinolones has been shown to elevate plasma concentrations of theophylline, interfere with the metabolism of caffeine, and enhance the effects of the oral anticoagulant warfarin and its derivatives, and has been associated with transient elevations in serum creatinine in patients receiving systemic cyclosporine concomitantly.
poor metabolizers have higher than expected plasma concentrations of tricyclic antidepressants (tcas) when given usual doses.
cimetidine) and many that are substrates for p450 2d6 (many other antidepressants, phenothiazines, and the type 1c antiarrhythmics propafenone and flecainide).
while all the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (ssris), e.g., citalopram, escitalopram, fluoxetine, sertraline, and paroxetine, inhibit p450 2d6, they may vary in the extent of inhibition.
the extent to which ssri-tca interactions may pose clinical problems will depend on the degree of inhibition and the pharmacokinetics of the ssri involved.
nevertheless, caution is indicated in the co-administration of tcas with any of the ssris and also in switching from one class to the other.
concomitant use of tricyclic antidepressants with drugs that can inhibit cytochrome p450 2d6 may require lower doses than usually prescribed for either the tricyclic antidepressant or the other drug.
it is desirable to monitor tca plasma levels whenever a tca is going to be co-administered with another drug known to be an inhibitor of p450 2d6.
inhibitors or substrates of cyp2d6 (i.e., quinidine, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors [ssris]) may increase the plasma concentration of doxepin when administered concomitantly.
mao inhibitors: serious side effects and even death have been reported following the concomitant use of certain drugs with mao inhibitors.
therefore, mao inhibitors should be discontinued at least two weeks prior to the cautious initiation of therapy with sinequan.
cimetidine: cimetidine has been reported to produce clinically significant fluctuations in steady-state serum concentrations of various tricyclic antidepressants.
serious anticholinergic symptoms (i.e., severe dry mouth, urinary retention and blurred vision) have been associated with elevations in the serum levels of tricyclic antidepressant when cimetidine therapy is initiated.
additionally, higher than expected tricyclic antidepressant levels have been observed when they are begun in patients already taking cimetidine.
in patients who have been reported to be well controlled on tricyclic antidepressants receiving concurrent cimetidine therapy, discontinuation of cimetidine has been reported to decrease established steady-state serum tricyclic antidepressant levels and compromise their therapeutic effects.
alcohol: it should be borne in mind that alcohol ingestion may increase the danger inherent in any intentional or unintentional sinequan overdosage.
tolazamide: a case of severe hypoglycemia has been reported in a type ii diabetic patient maintained on tolazamide (1 gm/day) 11 days after the addition of doxepin (75 mg/day).
effect of clonazepam on the pharmacokinetics of other drugs: clonazepam does not appear to alter the pharmacokinetics of phenytoin, carbamazepine, or phenobarbital.
effect of other drugs on the pharmacokinetics of clonazepam: literature reports suggest that ranitidine, an agent that decreases stomach acidity, does not greatly alter clonazepam pharmacokinetics.
in a study in which the 2 mg clonazepam orally disintegrating tablet was administered with and without propantheline (an anticholinergic agent with multiple effects on the gi tract) to healthy volunteers, the auc of clonazepam was 10% lower and the cmax of clonazepam was 20% lower when the orally disintegrating tablet was given with propantheline compared to when it was given alone.
fluoxetine does not affect the pharmacokinetics of clonazepam.
cytochrome p-450 inducers, such as phenytoin, carbamazepine and phenobarbital, induce clonazepam metabolism, causing an approximately 30% decrease in plasma clonazepam levels.
although clinical studies have not been performed, based on the involvement of the cytochrome p-450 3a family in clonazepam metabolism, inhibitors of this enzyme system, notably oral antifungal agents, should be used cautiously in patients receiving clonazepam.
pharmacodynamic interactions: the cns-depressant action of the benzodiazepine class of drugs may be potentiated by alcohol, narcotics, barbiturates, nonbarbiturate hypnotics, antianxiety agents, the phenothiazines, thioxanthene and butyrophenone classes of antipsychotic agents, monoamine oxidase inhibitors and the tricyclic antidepressants, and by other anticonvulsant drugs.
co-treatment with the potent cyp3a4 inhibitor ketoconazole increases erlotinib auc by 2/3.
caution should be used when administering or taking tarceva with ketoconazole and other strong cyp3a4 inhibitors such as, but not limited to, atazanavir, clarithromycin, indinavir, itraconazole, nefazodone, nelfinavir, ritonavir, saquinavir, telithromycin, troleandomycin (tao), and voriconazole .
pre-treatment with the cyp3a4 inducer rifampicin decreased erlotinib auc by about 2/3.
if the tarceva dose is adjusted upward, the dose will need to be reduced upon discontinuation of rifampicin or other inducers.
other cyp3a4 inducers include, but are not limited to, rifabutin, rifapentine, phenytoin, carbamazepine, phenobarbital and st. johns wort.
patients taking warfarin or other coumarin-derivative anticoagulants should be monitored regularly for changes in prothrombin time or inr
diuretics: patients on diuretics, especially those in whom diuretic therapy was recently instituted, may occasionally experience an excessive reduction of blood pressure after initiation of therapy with lotensin.
the possibility of hypotensive effects with lotensin can be minimized by either discontinuing the diuretic or increasing the salt intake prior to initiation of treatment with lotensin.
potassium supplements and potassium-sparing diuretics lotensin can attenuate potassium loss caused by thiazide diuretics.
potassium-sparing diuretics (spironolactone, amiloride, triamterene, and others) or potassium supplements can increase the risk of hyperkalemia.
oral anticoagulants interaction studies with warfarin and acenocoumarol failed to identify any clinically important effects on the serum concentrations or clinical effects of these anticoagulants.
lithium: increased serum lithium levels and symptoms of lithium toxicity have been reported in patients receiving ace inhibitors during therapy with lithium.
if a diuretic is also used, the risk of lithium toxicity may be increased.
other no clinically important pharmacokinetic interactions occurred when lotensin was administered concomitantly with hydrochlorothiazide, chlorthalidone, furosemide, digoxin, propranolol, atenolol, naproxen, or cimetidine.
lotensin has been used concomitantly with beta-adrenergic-blocking agents, calcium-channel-blocking agents, diuretics, digoxin, and hydralazine, without evidence of clinically important adverse interactions.
benazepril, like other ace inhibitors, has had less than additive effects with beta-adrenergic blockers, presumably because both drugs lower blood pressure by inhibiting parts of the renin-angiotensin system
anastrozole did not alter the pharmacokinetics of antipyrine.
although there have been no formal interaction studies other than with antipyrine, based on these in vivo and in vitro studies, it is unlikely that co-administration of a 1 mg dose of arimidex with other drugs will result in clinically significant drug inhibition of cytochrome p450-mediated metabolism of the other drugs.
an interaction study with warfarin showed no clinically significant effect of anastrozole on warfarin pharmacokinetics or anticoagulant activity.
at a median follow-up of 33 months, the combination of arimidex and tamoxifen did not demonstrate any efficacy benefit when compared with tamoxifen in all patients as well as in the hormone receptor-positive subpopulation.
based on clinical and pharmacokinetic results from the atac trial, tamoxifen should not be administered with anastrozole (see clinical pharmacology   drug interactions and clinical pharmacology - clinical studies - adjuvant treatment of breast cancer in postmenopausal women subsections).
co-administration of anastrozole and tamoxifen resulted in a reduction of anastrozole plasma levels by 27% compared with those achieved with anastrozole alone.
estrogen-containing therapies should not be used with arimidex as they may diminish its pharmacologic action.
a drug-drug interaction study evaluated the effect of the use of aczone gel, 5%, in combination with double strength (160 mg/800 mg) trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (tmp/smx).
during co-administration, systemic levels of tmp and smx were essentially unchanged.
notably, systemic exposure (auc0-12) of dapsone hydroxylamine (dha) was more than doubled in the presence of tmp/smx.
exposure from the proposed topical dose is about 1% of that from the 100 mg oral dose, even when co-administered with tmp/smx.
certain concomitant medications (such as rifampin, anticonvulsants, st.
john s wort) may increase the formation of dapsone hydroxylamine, a metabolite of dapsone associated with hemolysis.
with oral dapsone treatment, folic acid antagonists such as pyrimethamine have been noted to possibly increase the likelihood of hematologic reactions
chirocaine   should be used with caution in patients receiving other local anesthetics or agents structurally related to amide-type local anesthetics since the toxic effects of these drugs could be additive.
in vitro studies indicate cyp3a4 isoform and cyp1a2 isoform mediate the metabolism of levobupivacaine to desbutyl levobupivacaine and 3-hydroxy levobupivacaine, respectively.
thus agents likely to be concomitantly administered with chirocaine that are metabolized by this isoenzyme family may potentially interact with chirocaine.
although no clinical studies have been conducted, it is likely that the metabolism of levobupivacaine may be affected by the known cyp3a4 inducers (such as phenytoin, phenobarbital, rifampin), cyp3a4 inhibitors (azole antimycotics e.g., ketoconazole;
macrolide antibiotics e.g., erythromycin;
and calcium channel antagonists e.g., verapamil), cyp1a2 inducers (omeprazole) and cyp1a2 inhibitors (furafylline and clarithromycin).
dosage adjustment may be warranted when levobupivacaine is concurrently administered with cyp3a4 inhibitors and cyp1a2 inhibitors as systemic levobupivacaine levels may rise resulting in toxicity.
potential for other drugs to affect duloxetine: both cyp1a2 and cyp2d6 are responsible for duloxetine metabolism.
inhibitors of cyp1a2: concomitant use of duloxetine with fluvoxamine, an inhibitor of cyp1a2, results in approximately a 6-fold increase in auc and about a 2.5-fold increase in cmax of duloxetine.
inhibitors of cyp2d6: because cyp2d6 is involved in duloxetine metabolism, concomitant use of duloxetine with potent inhibitors of cyp2d6 may result in higher concentrations of duloxetine.
paroxetine (20 mg qd) increased the concentration of duloxetine (40 mg qd) by about 60%, and greater degrees of inhibition are expected with higher doses of paroxetine.
similar effects would be expected with other potent cyp2d6 inhibitors (e.g., fluoxetine, quinidine).
potential for duloxetine to affect other drugs: drugs metabolized by cyp1a2: in vitro drug interaction studies demonstrate that duloxetine does not induce cyp1a2 activity, and it is unlikely to have a clinically significant effect on the metabolism of cyp1a2 substrates.
when duloxetine was administered (at a dose of 60 mg bid) in conjunction with a single 50-mg dose of desipramine, a cyp2d6 substrate, the auc of desipramine increased 3-fold.
therefore, co-administration of duloxetine with other drugs that are extensively metabolized by this isozyme and which have a narrow therapeutic index, including certain antidepressants (tricyclic antidepressants [tcas], such as nortriptyline, amitriptyline, and imipramine), phenothiazines and type 1c antiarrhythmics (e.g., propafenone, flecainide), should be approached with caution.
plasma tca concentrations may need to be monitored and the dose of the tca may need to be reduced if a tca is co-administered with duloxetine.
because of the risk of serious ventricular arrhythmias and sudden death potentially associated with elevated plasma levels of thioridazine, duloxetine and thioridazine should not be co-administered.
duloxetine may have a clinically important interaction with the following other drugs: alcohol: when duloxetine and ethanol were administered several hours apart so that peak concentrations of each would coincide, duloxetine did not increase the impairment of mental and motor skills caused by alcohol.
in the duloxetine clinical trials database, three duloxetine-treated patients had liver injury as manifested by alt and total bilirubin elevations, with evidence of obstruction.
however, co-administration of duloxetine with aluminum- and magnesium-containing antacids (51 meq) or duloxetine with famotidine, had no significant effect on the rate or extent of duloxetine absorption after administration of a 40-mg oral dose.
it is unknown whether the concomitant administration of proton pump inhibitors affects duloxetine absorption.
preliminary data which suggest that dapsone may inhibit the anti-inflammatory activity of lamprene have not been confirmed.
if leprosy-associated inflammatory reactions develop in patients being treated with dapsone and clofazimine, it is still advisable to continue treatment with both drugs.
codeine in combination with other narcotic analgesics, general anesthetics, phenothiazines, tranquilizers, sedative-hypnotics, or other cns depressants (including alcohol) has additive depressant effects.
prior administration of succinylcholine has no clinically important effect on the neuromuscular blocking action of nuromax.
the use of nuromax before succinylcholine to attenuate some of the side effects of succinylcholine has not been studied.
there are no clinical data on concomitant use of nuromax and other nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents.
isoflurane, enflurane, and halothane decrease the ed50 of nuromax by 30% to 45%.
other drugs which may enhance the neuromuscular blocking action of nondepolarizing agents such as nuromax include certain antibiotics (e. g., aminoglycosides, tetracyclines, bacitracin, polymyxins, lincomycin, clindamycin, colistin, and sodium colistimethate), magnesium salts, lithium, local anesthetics, procainamide, and quinidine.
as with some other nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents, the time of onset of neuromuscular block induced by nuromax is lengthened and the duration of block is shortened in patients receiving phenytoin or carbamazepine.
ocupress should be used with caution in patients who are receiving a beta-adrenergic blocking agent orally because of the potential for additive effects on systemic beta-blockade.
close observation of the patient is recommended when a beta-blocker is administered to patients receiving catecholamine-depleting drugs such as reserpine, because of possible additive effects and the production of hypotension and/or marked bradycardia, which may produce vertigo, syncope, or postural hypotension.
no drugs are known to interfere with the conversion of fosphenytoin to phenytoin.
conversion could be affected by alterations in the level of phosphatase activity, but given the abundance and wide distribution of phosphatases in the body it is unlikely that drugs would affect this activity enough to affect conversion of fosphenytoin to phenytoin.
the pharmacokinetics and protein binding of fosphenytoin, phenytoin, and diazepam were not altered when diazepam and cerebyx were concurrently administered in single submaximal doses.
the most significant drug interactions following administration of cerebyx are expected to occur with drugs that interact with phenytoin.
the most commonly occurring drug interactions are listed below: - drugs that may increase plasma phenytoin concentrations include: acute alcohol intake, amiodarone, chboramphenicol, chlordiazepoxide, cimetidine, diazepam, dicumarol, disulfiram, estrogens, ethosuximide, fluoxetine, h2-antagonists, halothane, isoniazid, methylphenidate, phenothiazines, phenylbutazone, salicylates, succinimides, sulfonamides, tolbutamide, trazodone
- drugs that may decrease plasma phenytoin concentrations include: carbamazepine, chronic alcohol abuse, reserpine
- drugs that may either increase or decrease plasma phenytoin concentrations include: phenobarbital, vaiproic acid, and sodium valproate.
similarly, the effects of phenytoin on phenobarbital, valproic acid and sodium plasma valproate concentrations are unpredictable
- although not a true drug interaction, tricyclic antidepressants may precipitate seizures in susceptible patients and cerebyx dosage may need to be adjusted
- drugs whose efficacy is impaired by phenytoin include: anticoagulants, corticosteroids, coumarin, digitoxin, doxycycline, estrogens, furosemide, oral contraceptives, rifampin, quinidine, theophylline, vitamin d.
care should be taken when using immunoanalytical methods to measure plasma phenytoin concentrations following cerebyx administration.
the effects of ergomar may be potentiated by triacetyloleandomycin which inhibits the metabolism of ergotamine.
the pressor effects of ergomar and other vasoconstrictor drugs can combine to cause dangerous hypertension.
in addition to bleeding associated with heparin and vitamin k antagonists, drugs that alter platelet function (such as acetylsalicylic acid, dipyridamole and abciximab) may increase the risk of bleeding if administered prior to, during, or after activase therapy.
use of antithrombotics aspirin and heparin have been administered concomitantly with and following infusions of activase in the management of acute myocardial infarction or pulmonary embolism.
because heparin, aspirin, or activase may cause bleeding complications, careful monitoring for bleeding is advised, especially at arterial puncture sites.
the concomitant use of heparin or aspirin during the first 24 hours following symptom onset were prohibited in the ninds t-pa stroke trial.
additive cns depression may occur when antihistamines are administered concomitantly with other cns depressants including barbiturates, tranquilizers, and alcohol.
patients receiving antihistamines should be advised against the concurrent use of other cns depressant drugs.
monoamine oxidase (mao) inhibitors prolong and intensify the anticholinergic effects of antihistamines.
drug interactions: flupenthixol may interact with some drugs, like monoamine oxidase inhibitors (maoi): maoi could theoretically affect flupenthixol pharmacodynamics - arecoline - eproxindine - ethanol: flupenthixol and ethanol cause additive cns depression - tricyclic antidepressants: flupenthixol increases the effect of tricyclic antidepressants
cholestyramine resin may delay or reduce the absorption of concomitant oral medication such as phenylbutazone, warfarin, thiazide diuretics (acidic) or propranolol (basic), as well as tetracycline penicillin g, phenobarbital, thyroid and thyroxine preparations, estrogens and progestins, and digitalis.
cholestyramine resin may interfere with the pharmacokinetics of drugs that undergo enterohepatic circulation, the discontinuance of cholestyramine resin could pose a hazard to health if a potentially toxic drug such as digitalis has been filtrated to a maintenance level while the patient was taking cholestyramine resin.
because cholestyramine binds bile acids, cholestyramine resin may interfere with normal fat digestion and absorption and thus may prevent absorption of fat soluble vitamins such as a, d, e, and k.
when cholestyramine resin is given for long periods of time, concomitant supplementation with water-miscible (or parenteral) forms of fat-soluble vitamins should be considered.
since cholestyramine resin may bind other drugs given concurrently, it is recommended that patients take other drugs at least 1 hour before or 4 to 6 hours after cholestyramine resin (or at as great an interval as possible) to avoid impeding their absorption.
administration of 0.1-mg/kg (2 x ed95) nimbex at 10% or 95% recovery following an intubating dose of succinylcholine (1 mg/kg) produced  95% neuromuscular block.
the time to onset of maximum block following nimbex is approximately 2 minutes faster with prior administration of succinylcholine.
prior administration of succinylcholine had no effect on the duration of neuromuscular block following initial or maintenance bolus doses of nimbex.
infusion requirements of nimbex in patients administered succinylcholine prior to infusions of nimbex were comparable to or slightly greater than when succinylcholine was not administered.
the use of nimbex before succinylcholine to attenuate some of the side effects of succinylcholine has not been studied.
although not studied systematically in clinical trials, no drug interactions were observed when vecuronium, pancuronium, or atracurium were administered following varying degrees of recovery from single doses or infusions of nimbex.
isoflurane or enflurane administered with nitrous oxide/oxygen to achieve 1.25 mac [minimum alveolar concentration] may prolong the clinically effective duration of action of initial and maintenance doses of nimbex and decrease the required infusion rate of nimbex.
fifteen to 30 minutes of exposure to 1.25 mac isoflurane or enflurane had minimal effects on the duration of action of initial doses of nimbex and therefore, no adjustment to the initial dose should be necessary when nimbex is administered shortly after initiation of volatile agents.
in long surgical procedures during enflurane or isoflurane anesthesia, less frequent maintenance dosing, lower maintenance doses, or reduced infusion rates of nimbex may be necessary.
in clinical studies propofol had no effect on the duration of action or dosing requirements for nimbex.
other drugs which may enhance the neuromuscular blocking action of nondepolarizing agents such as nimbex include certain antibiotics (e. g., aminoglycosides, tetracyclines, bacitracin, polymyxins, lincomycin, clindamycin, colistin, and sodium colistemethate), magnesium salts, lithium, local anesthetics, procainamide, and quinidine.
resistance to the neuromuscular blocking action of nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents has been demonstrated in patients chronically administered phenytoin or carbamazepine.
while the effects of chronic phenytoin or carbamazepine therapy on the action of nimbex are unknown, slightly shorter durations of neuromuscular block may be anticipated and infusion rate requirements may be higher.
bismuth: bismuth subsalicylate, given concomitantly with enoxacin or 60 minutes following enoxacin administration, decreased enoxacin bioavailability by approximately 25%.
thus, concomitant administration of enoxacin and bismuth subsalicylate should be avoided.
caffeine: enoxacin is a potent inhibitor of the cytochrome p-450 isozymes responsible for the metabolism of methylxanthines.
in a multiple-dose study, enoxacin caused a dose-related increase in the mean elimination half-life of caffeine, thereby decreasing the clearance of caffeine by up to 80% and leading to a five-fold increase in the auc and the half-life of caffeine.
trough plasma enoxacin levels were also 20% higher when caffeine and enoxacin were administered concomitantly.
caffeine-related adverse effects have occurred in patients consuming caffeine while on therapy with enoxacin.
cyclosporine: elevated serum levels of cyclosporine have been reported with concomitant use of cyclosporine with other members of the quinolone class.
digoxin: enoxacin may raise serum digoxin levels in some individuals.
if signs and symptoms suggestive of digoxin toxicity occur when enoxacin and digoxin are given concomitantly, physicians are advised to obtain serum digoxin levels and adjust digoxin doses appropriately.
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents: seizures have been reported in patients taking enoxacin concomitantly with the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug fenbufen.
sucralfate and antacids: quinolones form chelates with metal cations.
therefore, administration of quinolones with antacids containing calcium, magnesium, or aluminum;
or with multivitamins containing zinc may substantially interfere with drug absorption and result in insufficient plasma and tissue quinolone concentrations.
antacids containing aluminum hydroxide and magnesium hydroxide reduce the oral absorption of enoxacin by 75%.
the oral bioavailability of enoxacin is reduced by 60% with coadministration of ranitidine.
theophylline: enoxacin is a potent inhibitor of the cytochrome p-450 isozymes responsible for the metabolism of methylxanthines.
enoxacin interferes with the metabolism of theophylline resulting in a 42% to 74% dose-related decrease in theophylline clearance and a subsequent 260% to 350% increase in serum theophylline levels.
theophylline-related adverse effects have occurred in patients when theophylline and enoxacin were coadministered.
warfarin: quinolones, including enoxacin, decrease the clearance of r-warfarin, the less active isomer of racemic warfarin.
enoxacin does not affect the clearance of the active s-isomer, and changes in clotting time have not been observed when enoxacin and warfarin were coadministered.
nevertheless, the prothrombin time or other suitable coagulation test should be monitored when warfarin or its derivatives and enoxacin are given concomitantly.
when administered concurrently, the following drugs may interact with beta-adrenergic receptor blocking agents: anesthetics, general: exaggeration of the hypotension induced by general anesthetics.
antidiabetic drugs (oral agents and insulin): hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia;
anticholinergics or other medications with anticholinergic activity - anticholinergic effects may be potentiated when these medications are used concurrently with diphenidol;
apomorphine - prior ingestion of diphenidol may decrease the emetic response to apomorphine in the treatment of poisoning.
azlocillin should not be administered concomitantly with amikacin, ciprofloxacin, gentamicin, netilmicin, or tobramycin.
theophylline: twelve healthy male volunteers were administered one 200-mg ceftibuten capsule twice daily for 6 days.
with the morning dose of ceftibuten on day 6, each volunteer received a single intravenous infusion of theophylline (4 mg/kg).
the effect of ceftibuten on the pharmacokinetics of theophylline administered orally has not been investigated.
antacids or h 2 -receptor antagonists: the effect of increased gastric ph on the bioavailability of ceftibuten was evaluated in 18 healthy adult volunteers.
a single dose of liquid antacid did not affect the c max or auc of ceftibuten;
however, 150 mg of ranitidine q12h for 3 days increased the ceftibuten c max by 23% and ceftibuten auc by 16%.
the results of assays using red cells from healthy subjects to determine whether ceftibuten would cause direct coombs reactions in vitro showed no positive reaction at ceftibuten concentrations as high as 40  g/ml.
co-administration of botox and aminoglycosides or other agents interfering with neuromuscular transmission (e.g., curare-like compounds) should only be performed with caution as the effect of the toxin may be potentiated.
excessive neuromuscular weakness may be exacerbated by administration of another botulinum toxin prior to the resolution of the effects of a previously administered botulinum toxin.
cns-active drugs ethanol an additive effect on psychomotor performance was seen with coadministration of eszopiclone and ethanol 0.70 g/kg for up to 4 hours after ethanol administration.
paroxetine: coadministration of single doses of eszopiclone 3 mg and paroxetine 20 mg daily for 7 days produced no pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic interaction.
lorazepam: coadministration of single doses of eszopiclone 3 mg and lorazepam 2 mg did not have clinically relevant effects on the pharmacodynamics or pharmacokinetics of either drug.
olanzapine: coadministration of eszopiclone 3 mg and olanzapine 10 mg produced a decrease in dsst scores.
drugs that inhibit cyp3a4 (ketoconazole) cyp3a4 is a major metabolic pathway for elimination of eszopiclone.
the auc of eszopiclone was increased 2.2-fold by coadministration of ketoconazole, a potent inhibitor of cyp3a4, 400 mg daily for 5 days.
other strong inhibitors of cyp3a4 (e.g., itraconazole, clarithromycin, nefazodone, troleandomycin, ritonavir, nelfinavir) would be expected to behave similarly.
drugs that induce cyp3a4 (rifampicin) racemic zopiclone exposure was decreased 80% by concomitant useof rifampicin, a potent inducer of cyp3a4.
drugs with a narrow therapeutic index digoxin a single dose of eszopiclone 3 mg did not affect the pharmacokinetics of digoxin measured at steady state following dosing of 0.5 mg twice daily for one day and 0.25 mg daily for the next 6 days.
warfarin: eszopiclone 3 mg administered daily for 5 days did not affect the pharmacokinetics of (r)- or (s)-warfarin, nor were there any changes in the pharmacodynamic profile (prothrombin time) following a single 25 mg oral dose of warfarin
consequently, drugs with a low therapeutic margin, such as vitamin k antagonists, phenytoin, and theophylline, could have a delayed elimination and increases in their serum half-life leading to a toxic level.
for example, when vitamin k antagonists are administered concomitantly with nilutamide, prothrombin time should be carefully monitored and if necessary, the dosage of vitamin k antagonists should be reduced.
there have been isolated reports of patients experiencing increases in their prothrombin times when etidronate was added to warfarin therapy.
tetracycline, a bacteriostatic antibiotic, may antagonize the bactericidal effect of penicillin and concurrent use of these drugs should be avoided.
in vivo interaction studies in humans have demonstrated that digoxin and warfarin do not affect the pk properties of anagrelide, nor does anagrelide affect the pk properties of digoxin or warfarin.
although additional drug interaction studies have not been conducted, the most common medications used concomitantly with anagrelide in clinical trials were aspirin, acetaminophen, furosemide, iron, ranitidine, hydroxyurea, and allopurinol.
an in vivo interaction study in humans demonstrated that a single 1mg dose of anagrelide administered concomitantly with a single 900 mg dose of aspirin was generally well tolerated.
no clinically relevant pharmacokinetic interactions between anagrelide and acetylsalicylic acid were observed.
anagrelide alone had no effect on platelet aggregation, but did slightly enhance the inhibition of platelet aggregation by aspirin.
it is known that cyp1a2 is inhibited by several medicinal products, including fluvoxamine, and such medicinal products could theoretically adversely influence the clearance of anagrelide.
anagrelide demonstrates some limited inhibitory activity towards cyp1a2 which may present a theoretical potential for interaction with other coadministered medicinal products sharing that clearance mechanism e.g. theophylline.
the effects of medicinal products with similar properties such as inotropes milrinone, enoximone, amrinone, olprinone and cilostazol may be exacerbated by anagrelide.
there is a single case report, which suggests that sucralfate may interfere with anagrelide absorption.
however, it was observed that the pharmacokinetics of enbrel  was unaltered by concomitant methotrexate in rheumatoid arthritis patients.
in a study in which patients with active ra were treated for up to 24 weeks with concurrent enbrel  and anakinra therapy, a 7% rate of serious infections was observed, which was higher than that observed with enbrel  alone (0%).
two percent of patients treated concurrently with enbrel  and anakinra developed neutropenia (anc   1 x 109/l).
patients in a clinical study who were on established therapy with sulfasalazine, to which enbrel was added, were noted to develop a mild decrease in mean neutrophil counts in comparison to groups treated with either enbrel ci or sulfasalazine alone.
fenfluramine may increase slightly the effect of antihypertensive drugs, e.g., guanethidine, methyldopa, reserpine.
other cns depressant drugs should be used with caution in patients taking fenfluramine, since the effects may be additive.
immunosuppressive drugs, fibric acid derivatives, niacin (nicotinic acid, erythromycin, azole antifungals: skeletal muscle.
antacid (magnesium-aluminum hydroxide): cerivastatin plasma concentrations were not affected by co-administration of antacid.
cimetldine: cerivastatin plasma concentrations were not affected by co-administration of cimetidine.
cholestyramine: the influence of the bile-acidsequestering agent cholestyramine on the pharmacokinetits of cerivastatin sodium was evaluated in 12 healthy males in 2 separate randomized crossover studies.
in the first study, concomitant administration of 0.2 mg cerivastatin sodium and 12 g cholestyramine resulted in decreases of more than 22% for auc and 40% for cmax when compared to dosing cerivastatin sodium alone.
however, in the second study, administration of 12 g cholestyramine 1 hour before the evening meal and 0.3 mg cerivastatin sodium approximately 4 hours after the same evening meal resulted in a decrease in the cerivastatin auc of less than 8%, and a decrease in cmax of about 30% when compared to dosing cerivastatin sodium alone.
therefore, it would be expected that a dosing schedule of cerivastatin sodium given at bedtime and cholestyramine given before the evening meal would not result in a significant decrease in the clinical effect of cerivastatin sodium.
digoxin: plasma digoxin levels and digoxin clearance at steady-state were not affected by co-administration of 0.2 mg cerivastatin sodium.
cerivastatin plasma concentrations were also not affected by co-administration of digoxin.
warfarin: co- administration of warfarin and cerivastatin to healthy volunteers did not result in any changes in prothrombin time or clotting factor vii when compared to co-administration of warfarin and placebo.
the auc and cmax of both the (r) and (s) isomers of warfarin were unaffected by concurrent dosing of 0.3 mg cerivastatin sodium.
co-administration of warfarin and cerivastatin did not alter the pharmacokinetics of cerivastatin sodium.
erythromycin: in hypercholesterolemic patients, steady-state cerivastatin auc and cmax increased approximately 50% and 24% respectively after 10 days with co-administration of erythromycin, a known inhibitor of cytochrome p450 3a4.
other concomitant therapy: although specific interaction studies were not performed, in clinical studies, cerivastatin sodium was used concomitantly with angiotensin- converting enzyme (ace) inhibitors, betablockers, calcium-channel blockers, diuretics, and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (nsaids) without evidence of clinically significant adverse interactions.
increases in prothrombin time have been noted in patients receiving long- term warfarin therapy after flutamide was initiated.
therefore, close monitoring of prothrombin time is recommended and adjustment of the anticoagulant dose may be necessary when eulexin capsules are administered concomitantly with warfarin.
cyp3a4 inhibitors felodipine is metabolized by cyp3a4.
co-administration of cyp3a4 inhibitors (eg, ketoconazole, itraconazole, erythromycin, grapefruit juice, cimetidine) with felodipine may lead to several- fold increases in the plasma levels of felodipine, either due to an increase in bioavailability or due to a decrease in metabolism.
these effects have been observed with co-administration of itraconazole (a potent cyp3a4 inhibitor).
caution should be used when cyp3a4 inhibitors are co-administered with felodipine.
the following specific interactions have been reported: itraconazole co-administration of another extended release formulation of felodipine with itraconazole resulted in approximately 8-fold increase in the auc, more than 6- fold increase in the cmax, and 2-fold prolongation in the half- life of felodipine.
erythromycin co-administration of felodipine (plendil) with erythromycin resulted in approximately 2.5- fold increase in the auc and cmax, and about 2- fold prolongation in the half- life of felodipine.
grapefruit juice co-administration of felodipine with grapefruit juice resulted in more than 2-fold increase in the auc and cmax, but no prolongation in the half- life of felodipine.
cimetidine co-administration of felodipine with cimetidine (a non-specific cyp-450 inhibitor) resulted in an increase of approximately 50% in the auc and the cmax, of felodipine.
beta-blocking agents  a pharmacokinetic study of felodipine in conjunction with metoprolol demonstrated no significant effects on the pharmacokinetics of felodipine.
in controlled clinical trials, however, beta blockers including metoprolol were concurrently administered with felodipine and were well tolerated.
digoxin  when given concomitantly with plendil the pharmacokinetics of digoxin in patients with heart failure were not significantly altered.
anticonvulsants: in a pharmacokinetic study, maximum plasma concentrations of felodipine were considerably lower in epileptic patients on long-term anticonvulsant therapy (eg, phenytoin, carbamazepine, or phenobarbital) than in healthy volunteers.
tacrolimus  felodipine may increase the blood concentration of tacrolimus.
when given concomitantly with felodipine, the tacrolimus blood concentration should be followed and the tacrolimus dose may need to be adjusted.
other concomitant therapy  in healthy subjects there were no clinically significant interactions when felodipine was given concomitantly with indomethacin or spironolactone.
ace inhibitors: reports suggest that nsaids may diminish the antihypertensive effect of angiotensin converting enzyme (ace) inhibitors.
in patients with mild to moderate hypertension, administration of 25 mg daily of vioxx with the ace inhibitor benazepril, 10 to 40 mg for 4 weeks, was associated with an average increase in mean arterial pressure of about 3 mm hg compared to ace inhibitor alone.
this interaction should be given consideration in patients taking vioxx concomitantly with ace inhibitors.
aspirin: concomitant administration of low-dose aspirin with vioxx may result in an increased rate of gi ulceration or other complications, compared to use of vioxx alone.
in a 12-week endoscopy study conducted in oa patients there was no difference in the cumulative incidence of endoscopic gastroduodenal ulcers in patients taking low-dose (81 mg) enteric coated aspirin plus vioxx 25 mg daily, as compared to those taking ibuprofen 2400 mg daily alone.
patients taking low-dose aspirin plus ibuprofen were not studied.
at steady state, vioxx 50 mg once daily had no effect on the anti-platelet activity of low-dose (81 mg once daily) aspirin, as assessed by ex vivo platelet aggregation and serum txb2 generation in clotting blood.
because of its lack of platelet effects, vioxx is not a substitute for aspirin for cardiovascular prophylaxis.
prospective, long-term studies on concomitant administration of vioxx and aspirin have not been conducted.
cimetidine: co-administration with high doses of cimetidine [800 mg twice daily] increased the cmax of rofecoxib by 21%, the auc0-120hr by 23% and the t1/2 by 15%.
digoxin: rofecoxib 75 mg once daily for 11 days does not alter the plasma concentration profile or renal elimination of digoxin after a single 0.5 mg oral dose.
furosemide: clinical studies, as well as post-marketing observations, have shown that nsaids can reduce the natriuretic effect of furosemide and thiazides in some patients.
ketoconazole: ketoconazole 400 mg daily did not have any clinically important effect on the pharmacokinetics of rofecoxib.
lithium: nsaids have produced an elevation of plasma lithium levels and a reduction in renal lithium clearance.
thus, when vioxx and lithium are administered concurrently, subjects should be observed carefully for signs of lithium toxicity.
methotrexate vioxx 12.5, 25, and 50 mg, each dose administered once daily for 7 days, had no effect on the plasma concentration of methotrexate as measured by auc0-24hr in patients receiving single weekly methotrexate doses of 7.5 to 20 mg for rheumatoid arthritis.
at higher than recommended doses, vioxx 75 mg administered once daily for 10 days increased plasma concentrations by 23% as measured by auc0-24hr in patients receiving methotrexate 7.5 to 15 mg/week for rheumatoid arthritis.
at 24 hours postdose, a similar proportion of patients treated with methotrexate alone (94%) and subsequently treated with methotrexate co-administered with 75 mg of rofecoxib (88%) had methotrexate plasma concentrations below the measurable limit (5 ng/ml).
standard monitoring of methotrexate-related toxicity should be continued if vioxx and methotrexate are administered concomitantly.
oral contraceptives rofecoxib did not have any clinically important effect on the pharmacokinetics of ethinyl estradiol and norethindrone.
prednisone/prednisolone: rofecoxib did not have any clinically important effect on the pharmacokinetics of prednisolone or prednisone.
rifampin: co-administration of vioxx with rifampin 600 mg daily, a potent inducer of hepatic metabolism, produced an approximate 50% decrease in rofecoxib plasma concentrations.
therefore, a starting daily dose of 25 mg of vioxx should be considered for the treatment of osteoarthritis when vioxx is co-administered with potent inducers of hepatic metabolism.
theophylline vioxx 12.5, 25, and 50 mg administered once daily for 7 days increased plasma theophylline concentrations (auc(0- )) by 38 to 60% in healthy subjects administered a single 300-mg dose of theophylline.
adequate monitoring of theophylline plasma concentrations should be considered when therapy with vioxx is initiated or changed in patients receiving theophylline.
therefore, there is a potential for an interaction with other drugs that are metabolized by cyp 1a2 (e.g., amitriptyline, tacrine, and zileuton).
warfarin: anticoagulant activity should be monitored, particularly in the first few days after initiating or changing vioxx therapy in patients receiving warfarin or similar agents, since these patients are at an increased risk of bleeding complications.
in single and multiple dose studies in healthy subjects receiving both warfarin and rofecoxib, prothrombin time (measured as inr) was increased by approximately 8% to 11%.
in post-marketing experience, bleeding events have been reported, predominantly in the elderly, in association with increases in prothrombin time in patients receiving vioxx concurrently with warfarin.
elevated plasma levels of theophylline have been reported with concomitant use of some quinolones.
there have been reports of theophylline-related side-effects in patients on concomitant theophylline-quinolone therapy.
therefore, monitoring of theophylline plasma levels should be considered and dosage of theophylline adjusted as required.
quinolones have also been shown to interfere with the metabolism of caffeine.
although this interaction has not been reported with cinoxacin, caution should be exercised when cinoxacin is given concomitantly with caffeine-containing products.
antacids or sucralfate substantially interfere with the absorption of some quinolones, resulting in low urine levels.
also, concomitant administration of quinolones with products containing iron, multivitamins containing zinc, or videx (didanosine) chewable/buffered tablets or the pediatric powder for oral solution may result in low urine levels.
quinolones, including cinoxacin, may enhance the effects of oral anticoagulants, such as warfarin or its derivatives.
seizures have been reported in patients taking another quinolone class antimicrobial and the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug fenbufen concurrently.
physicians are provided this information to increase awareness of the potential for serious interactions when cinoxacin and certain nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents are administered concomitantly.
elevated cyclosporine serum levels have been reported with the concomitant use of quinolones and cyclosporine.
the daily dose of enablex should not exceed 7.5 mg when coadministered with potent cyp3a4 inhibitors (e.g., ketoconazole, itraconazole, ritonavir, nelfinavir, clarithromycin and nefazadone) .
caution should be taken when enablex is used concomitantly with medications that are predominantly metabolized by cyp2d6 and which have a narrow therapeutic window, such as flecainide, thioridazine and tricyclic antidepressants (see clinical pharmacology).
the concomitant use of enablex with other anticholinergic agents may increase the frequency and/or severity of dry mouth, constipation, blurred vision and other anticholinergic pharmacological effects.
antiretroviral agents: no drug interactions with other antiretroviral medications have been identified that would warrant alteration of either the enfuvirtide dose or the dose of the other antiretroviral medication.
hypotension: patients on diuretic therapy: patients on diuretics and especially those in whom diuretic therapy was recently instituted, may occasionally experience an excessive reduction of blood pressure after initiation of therapy with enalapril or enalaprilat.
the possibility of hypotensive effects with enalapril or enalaprilat can be minimized by either discontinuing the diuretic or increasing the salt intake prior to initiation of treatment with enalapril or enalaprilat.
agents causing renin release: the antihypertensive effect of enalapril and enalapril iv is augmented by antihypertensive agents that cause renin release (e.g., diuretics).
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents: in some patients with compromised renal function who are being treated with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, the co-administration of enalapril may result in a further deterioration of renal function.
in a clinical pharmacology study, indomethacin or sulindac was administered to hypertensive patients receiving vasotec.
however, reports suggest that nsaids may diminish the antihypertensive effect of ace inhibitors.
this interaction should be given consideration in patients taking nsaids concomitantly with ace inhibitors.
other cardiovascular agents: enalapril and enalapril iv have been used concomitantly with beta adrenergic-blocking agents, methyldopa, nitrates, calcium-blocking agents, hydralazine, prazosin and digoxin without evidence of clinically significant adverse interactions.
enalapril iv has been used concomitantly with digitalis without evidence of clinically significant adverse reactions.
agents increasing serum potassium: enalapril and enalapril iv attenuate potassium loss caused by thiazide-type diuretics.
potassium-sparing diuretics (e.g., spironolactone, triamterene, or amiloride), potassium supplements, or potassium-containing salt substitutes may lead to significant increases in serum potassium.
lithium: lithium toxicity has been reported in patients receiving lithium concomitantly with drugs which cause elimination of sodium, including ace inhibitors.
it is recommended that serum lithium levels be monitored frequently if enalapril is administered concomitantly with lithium.
in some cases where serious ventricular arrhythmias, qt prolongation, and torsades de pointes have occurred when cisapride was taken in conjunction with one of the cytochrome p450 3a4 inhibitors, elevated blood cisapride levels were noted at the time of the qt prolongation.
antibiotics: in vitro and/or in vivo data show that clarithromycin, erythromycin, and troleandomycin markedly inhibit the metabolism of cisapride, which can result in an increase in plasma cisapride levels and prolongation of the qt interval on the ecg.
anticholinergics: concurrent administration of certain anticholinergic compounds, such as belladonna alkaloids and dicyclomine, would be expected to compromise the beneficial effects of cisapride.
anticoagulants (oral): in patients receiving oral anticoagulants, the coagulation times were increased in some cases.
it is advisable to check coagulation time within the first few days after the start and discontinuation of cisapride therapy, with an appropriate adjustment of the anticoagulant dose, if necessary.
antidepressants: in vitro data indicate that nefazodone inhibits the metabolism of cisapride, which can result in an increase in plasma cisapride levels and prolongation of the qt interval on the ecg.
antifungals: in vitro and/or in vivo data indicate that fluconazole, itraconazole, and oral ketoconazole markedly inhibit the metabolism of cisapride, which can result in an increase in plasma cisapride levels and prolongation of the qt interval on the ecg.
human pharmacokinetic data indicate that oral ketoconazole markedly inhibits the metabolism of cisapride, resulting in a mean eight-fold increase in auc of cisapride.
a study in 14 normal male and female volunteers suggests that coadministration of cisapride and ketoconazole can result in prolongation of the qt interval on the ecg.
h2 receptor antagonists: cimetidine coadministration leads to an increased peak plasma concentration and auc of cisapride, there is no effect on cisapride absorption when it is coadministered with ranitidine.
the gastrointestinal absorption of cimetidine and ranitidine is accelerated when they are coadministered with cisapride.
protease inhibitors: in vitro data indicate that indinavir and ritonavir markedly inhibit the metabolism of cisapride which can result in an increase in plasma cisapride levels and prolongation of the qt interval on the ecg.
other: coadministration of grapefruit juice with cisapride increases the bioavailability of cisapride and concomitant use should be avoided.
cisapride should not be used concomitantly with other drugs known to prolong the qt interval: certain antiarrhythmics, including those of class ia (such as quinidine and procainamide) and class iii (such as sotalol);
tricyclic antidepressants (such as amitriptyline);
certain tetracyclic antidepressants (such as maprotiline);
certain antipsychotic medications (such as sertindole);
astemizole, bepridil, sparfloxacin, and terodiline.
because the tetracyclines have been shown to depress plasma prothrombin activity, patients who are on anticoagulant therapy may require downward adjustment of their anticoagulant dosage.
since bacteriostatic drugs, such as the tetracycline class of antibiotics, may interfere with the bactericidal action of penicillins, it is not advisable to administer these drugs concomitantly.
concurrent use of tetracyclines with oral contraceptives may render oral contraceptives less effective.
urinary acidifying agents these agents (ammonium chloride, sodium acid phosphate, etc.) increase the concentration of the ionized species of the amphetamine molecule, thereby increasing urinary excretion.
adrenergic blockers adrenergic blockers are inhibited by amphetamines.
antidepressants, tricyclic amphetamines may enhance the activity of tricyclic antidepressants or sympathomimetic agents;
d-amphetamine with desipramine or protriptyline and possibly other tricyclics cause striking and sustained increases in the concentration of d-amphetamine in the brain;
mao inhibitors maoi antidepressants, as well as a metabolite of furazolidone, slow amphetamine metabolism.
antihistamines: amphetamines may counteract the sedative effect of antihistamines.
antihypertensives: amphetamines may antagonize the hypotensive effects of antihypertensives.
chlorpromazine: chlorpromazine blocks dopamine and norepinephrine receptors, thus inhibiting the central stimulant effects of amphetamines and can be used to treat amphetamine poisoning.
ethosuximide: amphetamines may delay intestinal absorption of ethosuximide.
haloperidol: haloperidol blocks dopamine receptors, thus inhibiting the central stimulant effects of amphetamines.
lithium carbonate: the anorectic and stimulatory effects of amphetamines may be inhibited by lithium carbonate.
meperidine: amphetamines potentiate the analgesic effect of meperidine.
methenamine therapy urinary excretion of amphetamines is increased, and efficacy is reduced by acidifying agents used in methenamine therapy.
norepinephrine: amphetamines enhance the adrenergic effect of norepinephrine.
phenobarbital: amphetamines may delay intestinal absorption of phenobarbital;
phenytoin: amphetamines may delay intestinal absorption of phenytoin;
propoxyphene: in cases of propoxyphene overdosage, amphetamine cns stimulation is potentiated and fatal convulsions can occur.
veratrum alkaloids: amphetamines inhibit the hypotensive effect of veratrum alkaloids.
the extent of plasma protein binding of atovaquone in human plasma is not affected by the presence of therapeutic concentrations of phenytoin (15 mcg/ ml), nor is the binding of phenytoin affected by the presence of atovaquone.
rifampin: coadministration of rifampin and mepron suspension results in a significant decrease in average steady- state plasma atovaquone concentrations.
alternatives to rifampin should be considered during the course of pcp treatment with mepron.
rifabutin, another rifamycin, is structurally similar to rifampin and may possibly have some of the same drug interactions as rifampin.
no interaction trials have been conducted with mepron and rifabutin.
acetaminophen: a report of severe acetaminophen toxicity was reported in a patient receiving isoniazid.
it is believed that the toxicity may have resulted from a previously unrecognized interaction between isoniazid and acetaminophen and a molecular basis for this interaction has been proposed.
furthermore it has been proposed that isoniazid resulted in induction of p-450iie1 in the patients liver which, in turn, resulted in a greater proportion of the ingested acetaminophen being converted to the toxic metabolites.
carbamazepine: isoniazid is known to slow the metabolism of carbamazepine and increase its serum levels carbamazepine levels should be determined prior to concurrent administration with isoniazid, signs and symptoms of carbamazepine toxicity should be monitored closely, and appropriate dosage adjustment of the anticonvulsant should be made.
ketoconazole: potential interaction of ketoconazole and isoniazid may exist.
phenytoin: isoniazid may increase serum levels of phenytoin.
to avoid phenytoin intoxication, appropriate adjustment of the anticonvulsant should be made.
therophylline: a recent study has shown that concomitan administration of isoniazid and theophylline may cause elevated plasma levels of theophylline, and in some instances a slight decrease in the elimination of isoniazid.
since the therapeutic range of theophylline is narrow theophylline serum levels should be monitored closely, and appropriate dosage adjustments of theophylline should be made.
valproate: a recent case study has shown a possible increase in the plasma level of valproate when co administered with isoniazid.
plasma valproate concentration should be monitored when isoniazid and valproate are co administered, and appropriate dosage adjustments of valproate should be made.
steroids enhance the renal toxicity of edetate calcium disodium in animals. 7 edetate calcium disodium interferes with the action of zinc insulin preparations by chelating the zinc. 7
the potential for clinically significant drug-drug interactions posed by dolasetron and hydrodolasetron appears to be low for drugs commonly used in chemotherapy or surgery, because hydrodolasetron is eliminated by multiple routes.
blood levels of hydrodolasetron increased 24% when dolasetron was coadministered with cimetidine (nonselective inhibitor of cytochrome p-450) for 7 days, and decreased 28% with coadministration of rifampin (potent inducer of cytochrome p-450) for 7 days.
in patients taking furosemide, nifedipine, diltiazem, ace inhibitors, verapamil, glyburide, propranolol, and various chemotherapy agents, no effect was shown on the clearance of hydrodolasetron.
clearance of hydrodolasetron decreased by about 27% when dolasetron mesylate was administered intravenously concomitantly with atenolol.
dolasetron mesylate did not inhibit the antitumor activity of four chemotherapeutic agents (cisplatin, 5-fluorouracil, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide) in four murine models.
the concomitant intake of alcohol and acamprosate does not affect the pharmacokinetics of either alcohol or acamprosate.
pharmacokinetic studies indicate that administration of disulfiram or diazepam does not affect the pharmacokinetics of acamprosate.
co-administration of naltrexone with acamprosate produced a 25% increase in auc and a 33% increase in the cmax of acamprosate.
the pharmacokinetics of naltrexone and its major metabolite 6-beta-naltrexol were unaffected following co-administration with acamprosate.
other concomitant therapies: in clinical trials, the safety profile in subjects treated with acamprosate concomitantly with anxiolytics, hypnotics and sedatives (including benzodiazepines), or non-opioid analgesics was similar to that of subjects taking placebo with these concomitant medications.
patients taking acamprosate concomitantly with antidepressants more commonly reported both weight gain and weight loss, compared with patients taking either medication alone.
atrovent inhalation aerosol has been used concomitantly with other drugs, including sympathomimetic bronchodilators, methylxanthines, and steroids, commonly used in the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
with the exception of albuterol, there are no formal studies fully evaluating the interaction effects of atrovent inhalation aerosol and these drugs with respect to effectiveness.
anticholinergic agents: although ipratropium bromide is minimally absorbed into the systemic circulation, there is some potential for an additive interaction with concomitantly used anticholinergic medications.
caution is therefore advised in the coadministration of atrovent inhalation aerosol with other anticholinergic-containing drugs.
5ht3 antagonists: based on reports of profound hypotension and loss of consciousness when apomorphine was administered with ondansetron, the concomitant use of apomorphine with drugs of the 5ht3 antagonist class (including, for example, ondansetron, granisetron, dolasetron, palonosetron, and alosetron) is contraindicated .
antihypertensive medications and vasodilators: the following adverse events were experienced more commonly in patients receiving concomitant antihypertensive medications or vasodilators (n = 94) compared to patients not receiving these concomitant drugs (n = 456): hypotension 10% vs 4%, myocardial infarction 3% vs 1%, serious pneumonia 5% vs 3%, serious falls 9% vs 3%, and bone and joint injuries 6% vs 2%.
dopamine antagonists: since apomorphine is a dopamine agonist, it is possible that dopamine antagonists, such as the neuroleptics (phenothiazines, butyrophenones, thioxanthenes) or metoclopramide, may diminish the effectiveness of apokyn.
patients with major psychotic disorders, treated with neuroleptics, should be treated with dopamine agonists only if the potential benefits outweigh the risks.
mao inhibitors prolong and intensify the effects of antihistamines.
concomitant use of antihistamines with alcohol, tricyclic antidepressants, barbiturates, or other central nervous system depressants may have an additive effect.
when sympathomimetic drugs are given to patients receiving monoamine oxidase inhibitors, hypertensive reactions, including hypertensive crises, may occur.
the antihypertensive effects of methyldopa, mecamylamine, reserpine, and veratrum alkaloids may be reduced by sympathomimetics.
beta-adrenergic blocking agents may also interact with sympathomimetics.
increased ectopic pacemaker activity can occur when pseudoephedrine is used concomitantly with digitalis.
antacids increase the rate of absorption of pseudoephedrine, while kaolin decreases it.
although acid-base and electrolyte disturbances were not reported in the clinical trials with dorzolamide, these disturbances have been reported with oral carbonic anhydrase inhibitors and have, in some instances, resulted in drug interactions (e.g., toxicity associated with high-dose salicylate therapy).
amphotericin b or potassium-depleting diuretics (benzothiadiazines and related drugs, ethacrynic acid and furosemide) enhanced hypokalemia.
digitalis glycosides enhanced possibility of arrhythmias or digitalis toxicity associated with hypokalemia.
antidiabetic drugs (oral agents and insulin) diminished antidiabetic effect.
rarely salicylate toxicity may occur in patients who discontinue steroids after concurrent high-dose aspirin therapy.
monitor salicylate levels or the therapeutic effect for which aspirin is given;
barbiturates, phenytoin, or rifampin increased metabolic clearance of fludrocortisone acetate because of the induction of hepatic enzymes.
observe the patient for possible diminished effect of steroid and increase the steroid dosage accordingly.
anabolic steroids (particularly c-17 alkylated androgens such as oxymetholone, methandrostenolone, norethandrolone, and similar compounds) enhanced tendency toward edema.
when estrogen therapy is initiated, a reduction in corticosteroid dosage may be required, and increased amounts may be required when estrogen is terminated.
patients on warfarin-type anticoagulant therapy may require dosage adjustment of the anticoagulant during and after griseofulvin therapy.
concomitant use of barbiturates usually depresses griseofulvin activity and may necessitate raising the dosage.
the concomitant administration of griseofulvin has been reported to reduce the efficacy of oral contraceptives and to increase the incidence of breakthrough bleeding.
the potential for increased sedation when guanfacine is given with other cns-depressant drug should be appreciated.
the administration of guanfacine concomitantly with known microsomal enzyme inducer (phenobarbital or phenytoin) to two patients with renal impairment reportedly resulted in significant reductions in elimination half-life and plasma concentration.
tcas decrease the hypotensive effect of guanfacine.
noncardioselective beta-blockers (nadolol,porpranolol,timolol) may exacerbate rebound hypertension when guanfacine is withdrawn.
the gradual withdrawal of guafacine or a cardioselective beta-blocker could be substituted.
anticoagulants: ten patients who were stabilized on oral anticoagulants were given guanfacine, 1-2 mg/day, for 4 weeks.
in several well-controlled studies, guanfacine was administered together with diuretics with no drug interactions reported.
the principal drugs given (number of patients in parentheses) were: cardiac glycosides (115), sedatives and hypnotics (103), coronary vasodilators (52), oral hypoglycemics (45), cough and cold preparations (45), nsaids (38), antihyperlipidemics (29), antigout drugs (24), oral contraceptives (18), bronchodilators (13), insulin (10), and beta blockers (10).
agents that inhibit cytochrome p450 isoenzymes and/or epoxide hydrolase carbamazepine is metabolized mainly by cytochrome p450 (cyp) 3a4 to the active carbamazepine 10,11-epoxide, which is further metabolized to the trans-diol by epoxide hydrolase.
agents that are cyp3a4 inhibitors that have been found, or are expected, to increase plasma levels of equetrotm are the following: acetazolamide, azole antifungals, cimetidine, clarithromycin(1), dalfopristin, danazol, delavirdine, diltiazem, erythromycin(1), fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, grapefruit juice, isoniazid, itraconazole, ketoconazole, loratadine, nefazodone, niacinamide, nicotinamide, protease inhibitors, propoxyphene, quinine, quinupristin, troleandomycin, valproate(1), verapamil, zileuton.
thus, if a patient has been titrated to a stable dosage of equetrotm, and then begins a course of treatment with one of these cyp3a4 or epoxide hydrolase inhibitors, it is reasonable to expect that a dose reduction for equetrotm may be necessary.
agents that are cyp inducers that have been found, or are expected, to decrease plasma levels of equetrotm are the following: cisplatin, doxorubicin hcl, felbamate, rifampin, phenobarbital, phenytoin(2), primidone, methsuximide, and theophylline thus, if a patient has been titrated to a stable dosage on equetrotm, and then begins a course of treatment with one of these cyp3a4 inducers, it is reasonable to expect that a dose increase for equetrotm may be necessary.
agents with decreased levels in the presence of carbamazepine due to induction of cytochrome p450 enzymes carbamazepine is known to induce cyp1a2 and cyp3a4.
agents that have been found, or are expected to have decreased plasma levels in the presence of equetrotm due to induction of cyp enzymes are the following: acetaminophen, alprazolam, amitriptyline, bupropion, buspirone, citalopram, clobazam, clonazepam, clozapine, cyclosporin, delavirdine, desipramine, diazepam, dicumarol, doxycycline, ethosuximide, felbamate, felodipine, glucocorticoids, haloperidol, itraconazole, lamotrigine, levothyroxine, lorazepam, methadone, midazolam, mirtazapine, nortriptyline, olanzapine, oral contraceptives(3), oxcarbazepine, phenytoin(4), praziquantel, protease inhibitors, quetiapine, risperidone, theophylline, topiramate, tiagabine, tramadol, triazolam, valproate, warfarin(5) , ziprasidone, and zonisamide.
agents with increased levels in the presence of carbamazepine: equetrotm increases the plasma levels of the following agents: clomipramine hcl, phenytoin(6), and primidone thus, if a patient has been titrated to a stable dosage on one of the agents in this category, and then begins a course of the treatment with equetrotm, it is reasonable to expect that a dose decrease for the concomitant agent may be necessary.
pharmacological/pharmacodynamic interactions with carbamazepine concomitant administration of carbamazepine and lithium may increase the risk of neurotoxic side effects.
given the anticonvulsant properties of carbamazepine, equetrotm may reduce the thyroid function as has been reported with other anticonvulsants.
additionally, anti-malarial drugs, such as chloroquine and mefloquine, may antagonize the activity of carbamazepine.
because of its primary cns effect, caution should be used when equetrotm is taken with other centrally acting drugs and alcohol.
vasoconstrictors: d.h.e. 45  (dihydroergotamine mesylate) injection, usp should not be used with peripheral vasoconstrictors because the combination may cause synergistic elevation of blood pressure.
sumatriptan: sumatriptan has been reported to cause coronary artery vasospasm, and its effect could be additive with d.h.e. 45  (dihydroergotamine mesylate) injection, usp.
sumatriptan and d.h.e. 45  (dihydroergotamine mesylate) injection, usp should not be taken within 24 hours of each other..
beta blockers: although the results of a clinical study did not indicate a safe problem associated with the administration of d.h.e. 45  (dihydroergotamine mesylate) injection, usp to subjects already receiving propranolol, there have been reports that propranolol may potentiate the vasoconstrictive action of ergotamine by blocking the vasodilating property of epinephrine.
nicotine: nicotine may provoke vasoconstriction in some patients, predisposing to a greater ischemic response to ergot therapy.
macrolide antibiotics (e. g. erythromycin and troleandomycin): agents of the ergot alkaloid class, of which d.h.e. 45  (dihydroergotamine mesylate) injection, usp is a member, have been shown to interact with antibiotics of the macrolide class, resulting in increased plasma levels of unchanged alkaloids and peripheral vasoconstriction.
vasospastic reactions have been reported with therapeutic doses of ergotamine-containing drugs when co-administered with these antibiotics.
ssris: weakness hyperreflexia, and incoordination have been reported rarely when 5-ht1 agonists have been co-administered with ssris (e. g.
fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine, sertraline).
there have been no reported cases from spontaneous reports of drug interaction between ssris and d.h.e. 45  (dihydroergotamine mesylate) injection, usp.
oral contraceptives: the effect of oral contraceptives on the pharmacokinetics of d.h.e. 45  (dihydroergotamine mesylate) injection, usp has not been studied.
administration of thiazide diuretics to hypoparathyroid patients who are concurrently being treated with dihydrotachysterol may cause hypercalcemia.
ace-inhibitors reports suggest that nsaids may diminish the antihypertensive effect of ace-inhibitors.
this interaction should be given consideration in patients taking nsaids concomitantly with ace-inhibitors.
antacids: the concomitant administration of antacids has no apparent effect on the extent of absorption of lodine.
aspirin: when lodine is administered with aspirin, its protein binding is reduced, although the clearance of free etodolac is not altered.
however, as with other nsaids, concomitant administration of lodine and aspirin is not generally recommended because of the potential of increased adverse effects.
cyclosporine, digoxin, methotrexate lodine, like other nsaids, through effects on renal prostaglandins, may cause changes in the elimination of these drugs leading to elevated serum levels of cyclosporine, digoxin, methotrexate, and increased toxicity.
patients receiving these drugs who are given lodine, or any other nsaid, and particularly those patients with altered renal function, should be observed for the development of the specific toxicities of these drugs.
diuretics: etodolac has no apparent pharmacokinetic interaction when administered with furosemide or hydrochlorothiazide.
nevertheless, clinical studies, as well as postmarketing observations have shown that lodine can reduce the natriuretic effect of furosemide and thiazides in some patients.
glyburide: etodolac has no apparent pharmacokinetic interaction when administered with glyburide.
lithium: nsaids have produced an elevation of plasma lithium levels and a reduction in renal lithium clearance.
thus, when nsaids and lithium are administered concurrently, subjects should be observed carefully for signs of lithium toxicity.
phenylbutazone: phenylbutazone causes increase (by about 80%) in the free fraction of etodolac.
although in vivo studies have not been done to see if etodolac clearance is changed by coadministration of phenylbutazone, it is not recommended that they be coadministered.
phenytoin: etodolac has no apparent pharmacokinetic interaction when administered with phenytoin.
warfarin: the effects of warfarin and nsaids on gi bleeding are synergistic, such that users of both drugs together have a risk of serious gi bleeding higher than that of users of either drug alone.
short-term pharmacokinetic studies have demonstrated that concomitant administration of warfarin and lodine  (etodolac capsules and tablets) results in reduced protein binding of warfarin, but there was no change in the clearance of free warfarin.
there was no significant difference in the pharmacodynamic effect of warfarin administered alone and warfarin administered with lodine as measured by prothrombin time.
thus, concomitant therapy with warfarin and lodine should not require dosage adjustment of either drug.
however, caution should be exercised because there have been a few spontaneous reports of prolonged prothrombin times, with or without bleeding, in etodolac-treated patients receiving concomitant warfarin therapy.
drug/laboratory test interactions the urine of patients who take lodine can give a false-positive reaction for urinary bilirubin (urobilin) due to the presence of phenolic metabolites of etodolac.
drugs that induce hepatic enzymes such as phenobarbital, phenytoin and rifampin may increase the clearance of corticosteroids and may require increases in corticosteroid dose to achieve the desired response.
drugs such as troleandomycin and ketoconazole may inhibit the metabolism of corticosteroids and thus decrease their clearance.
corticosteroids may increase the clearance of chronic high dose aspirin.
this could lead to decreased salicylate serum levels or increase the risk of salicylate toxicity when corticosteroid is withdrawn.
aspirin should be used cautiously in conjunction with cortico-steroids in patients suffering from hypopro-thrombinemia.
the effect of corticosteroids on oral anticoagulants is variable.
there are reports of enhanced as well as diminished effects of anticoagulants when given concurrently with corticosteroids.
although specific drug interaction studies have not been conducted with alphagan p, the possibility of an additive or potentiating effect with cns depressants (alcohol, barbiturates, opiates, sedatives, or anesthetics) should be considered.
caution in using concomitant drugs such as beta-blockers (ophthalmic and systemic), anti-hypertensives and/or cardiac glycosides is advised.
tricyclic antidepressants have been reported to blunt the hypotensive effect of systemic clonidine.it is not known whether the concurrent use of these agents with alphagan p in humans can lead to resulting interference with the iop lowering effect.
these drugs include the thiazides and other diuretics, corticosteroids, phenothiazines, thyroid products, estrogens, oral contraceptives, phenytoin, nicotinic acid, sympathomimetics, calcium channel-blocking drugs, and isoniazid.
when such drugs are withdrawn from patients receiving acarbose in combination with sulfonylureas or insulin, patients should be observed closely for any evidence of hypoglycemia.
intestinal adsorbents (e. g., charcoal) and digestive enzyme preparations containing carbohydrate-splitting enzymes (e. g., amylase, pancreatin) may reduce the effect of acarbose and should not be taken concomitantly.
acarbose has been shown to change the bioavailabillty digoxin when they are co-administered, which may require digoxin dose adjustment.
studies in healthy volunteers have shown that acarbose has no effect on either the pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics of digoxin, nifedipine, propranolol, or ranitidine.
acarbose did not interfere with the absorption or disposition of the sulfonylurea glyburide in diabetic patients.
acarbose may affect digoxin bioavailabillty and may require dose adjustment of digoxin by 16% (90% confidence interval: 8-23%), decrease mean c max digoxin by 26% (90% confidence interval: 16-34%) and decrease mean trough concentrations of digoxin by 9% (90% confidence limit: 19% decrease to 2% increase).
the amount of metformin absorbed while taking acarbose was bioequivalent to the amount absorbed when taking placebo, as indicated by the plasma auc values.
however, the peak plasma level of metformin was reduced by approximately 20% when taking acarbose due to a slight delay in the absorption of metformin.
there is little if any clinically significant interaction between acarbose and metformin.
agents affecting cytochrome p450 3a4 isoenzyme system fentanyl is metabolized mainly via the human cytochrome p450 3a4 isoenzyme system (cyp3a4), therefore potential interactions may occur when duragesic  is given concurrently with agents that affect cyp3a4 activity.
the concomitant use of transdermal fentanyl with ritonavir or other potent 3a4 inhibitors such as ketoconazole, itraconazole, troleandomycin, clarithromycin, nelfinavir, and nefazadone may result in an increase in fentanyl plasma concentrations.
the concomitant use of other cyp3a4 inhibitors such as diltiazem and erythromycin with transdermal fentanyl may also result in an increase in fentanyl plasma concentrations, which could increase or prolong adverse drug effects and may cause serious respiratory depression.
central nervous system depressants: the concomitant use of duragesic  (fentanyl transdermal system) with other central nervous system depressants, including but not limited to other opioids, sedatives, hypnotics, tranquilizers (e.g., benzodiazepines), general anesthetics, phenothiazines, skeletal muscle relaxants, and alcohol, may cause respiratory depression, hypotension, and profound sedation, or potentially result in coma or death.
mao inhibitors: duragesic  is not recommended for use in patients who have received maoi within 14 days because severe and unpredictable potentiation by mao inhibitors has been reported with opioid analgesics
because tetracyclines have been shown to depress plasma prothrombin activity, patients who are on anticoagulant therapy may require downward adjustment of their anticoagulant dosage.
since bacteriostatic drugs may interfere with the bactericidal action of penicillin, it is advisable to avoid giving tetracyclines in conjunction with penicillin.
absorption of tetracyclines is impaired by antacids containing aluminum, calcium, or magnesium, and iron-containing preparations.
absorption of tetracycline is impaired by bismuth subsalicylate.
barbiturates, carbamazepine, and phenytoin decrease the half-life of doxycycline.
the concurrent use of tetracycline and penthrane (methoxyflurane) has been reported to result in fatal renal toxicity.
concurrent use of tetracycline may render oral contraceptives less effective.
the hypotensive effect of sodium nitroprusside is augmented by that of most other hypotensive drugs, including ganglionic blocking agents, negative inotropic agents, and inhaled anesthetics.
antihypertensive medications, other, especially diazoxide, or preanesthetic and anesthetic agents used in surgery or skeletal-muscle relaxants, nondepolarizing, used in surgery
amphotericin b or corticosteroids or corticotropin (acth)
(concurrent use with thiazide diuretics may enhance the possibility of digitalis toxicity associated with hypokalemia.)
for adult-onset diabetics, dosage adjustment of hypoglycemic medications may be necessary during and after thiazide diuretic therapy;
(concurrent use with thiazide diuretics is not recommended, as they may provoke lithium toxicity because of reduced renal clearance.)
(in some patients, the steroidal anti-inflammatory agent can reduce the diuretic, natriuretic, and antihypertensive effects of loop, potassium sparing, and thiazide diuretics.
therefore, when hydroflumethiazide and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents are used concomitantly, the patient should be observed closely to determine if the desired effect of the diuretic is obtained.)
(thiazides may decrease arterial responsiveness to norepinephrine.
(thiazide drugs may increase the responsiveness to tubocurarine.)
flexeril may have life-threatening interactions with mao inhibitors.
flexeril may enhance the effects of alcohol, barbiturates, and other cns depressants.
tricyclic antidepressants may block the antihypertensive action of guanethidine and similarly acting compounds.
tricyclic antidepressants may enhance the seizure risk in patients taking tramadol
erythromycin use in patients who are receiving high doses of theophylline may be associated with an increase in serum theophylline levels and potential theophylline toxicity.
in case of theophylline toxicity and/or elevated serum theophylline levels, the dose of theophylline should be reduced while the patient is receiving concomitant erythromycin therapy.
concomitant administration of erythromycin and digoxin has been reported to result in elevated digoxin serum levels.
there have been reports of increased anticoagulant effects when erythromycin and oral anticoagulants were used concomitantly.
concurrent use of erythromycin and ergotamine or dihydroergotamine has been associated in some patients with acute ergot toxicity characterized by severe peripheral vasospasm and dysesthesia.
erythromycin has been reported to decrease the clearance of triazolam and midazolam and thus may increase the pharmacologic effect of these benzodiazepines.
there have been reports of interactions of erythromycin with carbamazepine, cyclosporine, tacrolimus, hexobarbital, phenytoin, alfentanil, cisapride, disopyramide, lovastatin, bromocriptine, valproate, terfenadine, and astemizole.
erythromycin has been reported to significantly alter the metabolism of nonsedating antihistamines terfenadine and astemizole when taken concomitantly.
in addition, deaths have been reported rarely with concomitant administration of terfenadine and erythromycin.
there have been postmarketing reports of drug interactions when erythromycin is coadministered with cisapride, resulting in qt prolongation, cardiac arrythmias, ventricular tachycardia, ventricular fibrulation, and torsades de pointes, most like due to inhibition of hepatic metabolism of cisapride by erythromycin.
patients receiving concomitant lovastatin and erythromycin should be carefully monitored;
etonogestrel may interact with the following medications: acetaminophen (tylenol), antibiotics such as ampicillin and tetracycline, anticonvulsants (dilantin, phenobarbital, tegretol, trileptal, topamax, felbatol), antifungals (gris-peg, nizoral, sporanox), atorvastatin (lipitor), clofibrate (atromid-s), cyclosporine (neoral, sandimmune), hiv drugs classified as protease inhibitors (agenerase, crixivan, fortovase, invirase, kaletra, norvir, viracept), morphine (astramorph, kadian, ms contin), phenylbutazone, prednisolone (prelone), rifadin (rifampin), st. johns wort, temazepam, theophylline (theo-dur), and vitamin c.
beta-adrenergic blocking agents: concurrent use may blunt the response to arbutamine.
beta-adrenergic blocking agents should be withdrawn at least 48 hours before conducting an arbutamine-mediated stress test.
antiarrhythmic agents, class i (such as flecainide, lidocaine, or quinidine): concurrent use with arbutamine may have a proarrhythmic effect.
antidepressants (tricyclic), atropine or other anticholinergic agents, or digitalis glycosides: concurrent use with arbutamine may produce additive inotropic and/or chronotropic effects.
in patients receiving another serotonin reuptake inhibitor drug in combination with monoamine oxidase inhibitors (maoi), there have been reports of serious, sometimes fatal, reactions including hyperthermia, rigidity, myoclonus, autonomic instability with possible rapid fluctuations of vital signs, and mental status changes that include extreme agitation progressing to delirium and coma.
therefore, it is recommended that fluvoxamine tablets not be used in combination with maois, or within 14 days of discontinuing treatment with a maoi.
after stopping fluvoxamine tablets, at least 2 weeks should be allowed before starting a maoi.
potential terfenadine, astemizole, and cisapride interactions
terfenadine, astemizole and cisapride are all metabolized by the cytochrome p450iiia4 isozyme, and it has been demonstrated that ketoconazole, a potent inhibitor of iiia4, blocks the metabolism of these drugs, resulting in increased plasma concentrations of parent drug.
increased plasma concentrations of terfenadine, astemizole, and cisapride cause qt prolongation and have been associated with torsades de pointes-type ventricular tachycardia, sometimes fatal.
as noted below, a sub- for fluvoxamine in combination with alprazolam, a drug that is known to be metabolized by the iiia4 isozyme.
although it has not been definitively demonstrated that fluvoxamine is a potent iiia4 inhibitor, it is likely to be, given the substantial interaction of fluvoxamine with alprazolam.
consequently, it is recommended that fluvoxamine not be used in combination with either terbinafine, astemizole, or cisapride.
other potentially important drug interactions: benzodiazepines: benzodiazepines metabolized by hepatic oxidation (e.g., alprazolam, midazolam, triazolam elc.) should be used with caution because the clearance of these drugs is likely to be reduced by fluvoxamine.
the clearance of benzodiazepines metabolized by glucuronidation (e. g., lorazepam, oxazepam, temazepam) is unlikely to be affected by fluvoxamine.
alprazolam: when fluvoxamine maleate (100 mg qd) and alprazolam (1 mg q.d. were co-administered to steady state, plasma concentration and other pharmacokinetics parameters (auc, cmax, t1/2,) of alprazolam were approximately twice those observed when alprazolam was administered alone;
this interaction, which has not been investigated using higher doses of fluvoxamine, may be more pronounced if a 300 mg daily dose is co-administered, particularly since fluvoxamine exhibits non-linear pharmacokinetics over the dosage range 100-300 mg. if alprazolam is co-administered with fluvoxamine tablets, the initial alprazolam dosage should be at least halved and titration to the lowest effective dose is recommended.
diazepam: the co-administration of fluvoxamine tablets and diazepam is generally not advisable.
because fluvoxamine reduces the clearance of both diazepam and its active metabolite, n-desmethyldiazepam, there is a strong likelihood of substantial accumulation of both species during chronic co-administration.
evidence supporting the conclusion that it is inadvisable to co-administer fluvoxamine and diazepam is derived from a study in which healthy volunteers taking 150 mg/day of fluvoxamine were administered a single oral dose of 10 mg of diazepam.
in these subjects (r= b), the clearance of diazepam was reduced by 65% and that of n-desmethyldiazepam to a level that was too low to measure over the course of the 2 week long study.
moreover, as noted with alprazolam, the effect of fluvoxamine may even be more pronounced when it is administered at higher doses.
accordingly, diazepam and fluvoxamine should not ordinarily be co-administered.
theophylline: the effect of steady-state fluvoxamine l50 mg bid on the pharmacokinetics of a single dose of theophylline (375 mg) as 442 mg aminophylline was evaluated in 12 healthy non-smoking, male volunteers.
therefore, if theophylline is co-administered with fluvoxamine maleate, its dose should be reduced to one third of the usual daily maintenance dose and plasma concentrations of theophylline should to monitored.
warfarin: when fluvoxamine maleate (50 mg tid) was administered concomitantly with warfarin for two weeks, warfarin plasma concentrations increased by 98% and prothrombin times were prolonged.
thus patients receiving oral anticoagulants and fluvoxamine tablets should have their prothrombin time monitored and their anticoagulant dose adjusted accordingly.
use with allopurinol: the principal pathway for detoxification of azathioprine is inhibited by allopurinol.
patients receiving azathioprine and allopurinol concomitantly should have a dose reduction of azathioprine, to approximately 1/3 to 1/4 the usual dose.
use with angiotensln converting enzyme inhibitors: the use of angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors to control hypertension in patients on azathioprine has been reported to induce severe leukopenia.
oxytocin or other oxytocics (concurrent use with dinoprost may result in uterine hypertonus, possibly causing uterine rupture or cervical laceration, especially in the absence of adequate cervical dilatation;
chlorotrianisene may interact with antidepressants, aspirin, barbiturates, bromocriptine, calcium supplements, corticosteroids, corticotropin, cyclosporine, dantrolene, nicotine, somatropin, tamoxifen, and warfarin.
trecator has been found to temporarily raise serum concentrations of isoniazid.
trecator may potentiate the adverse effects of other antituberculous drugs administered concomitantly.
in particular, convulsions have been reported when ethionamide is administered with cycloserine and special care should be taken when the treatment regimen includes both of these drugs.
may interact with the following: beta-adrenergic blocking agents (these medicines may make your condition worse and prevent the adrenergic bronchodilators from working properly) and disopyramide, quinidine, phenothiazines, and procainamide (these medicines may increase the risk of heart problems).
the rate of metabolism and the leukopenic activity of cyclophosphamide reportedly are increased by chronic administration of high doses of phenobarbital.
the physician should be alert for possible combined drug actions, desirable or undesirable, involving cyclophosphamide even though cyclophosphamide has been used successfully concurrently with other drugs, including other cytotoxic drugs.
cyclophosphamide treatment, which causes a marked and persistent inhibition of cholinesterase activity, potentiates the effect of succinylcholine chloride.
there is one report of cardiopulmonary arrest, with full recovery, in a patient who was taking a beta blocker (propranolol).
because of the danger of a potentially fatal prolongation of the qtc interval, halofantrine must not be given simultaneously with or subsequent to mefloquine.
concomitant administration of mefloquine and other related compounds (eg, quinine, quinidine and chloroquine) may produce electrocardiographic abnormalities and increase the risk of convulsions.
this appears to be the only clinically relevant interaction of this kind with mefloquine, although theoretically, coadministration of other drugs known to alter cardiac conduction (eg, anti-arrhythmic or beta-adrenergic blocking agents, calcium channel blockers, antihistamines or h1-blocking agents, tricyclic antidepressants and phenothiazines) might also contribute to a prolongation of the qtc interval.
in patients taking an anticonvulsant (eg, valproic acid, carbamazepine, phenobarbital or phenytoin), the concomitant use of mefloquine may reduce seizure control by lowering the plasma levels of the anticonvulsant.
when mefloquine is taken concurrently with oral live typhoid vaccines, attenuation of immunization cannot be excluded.
nevertheless, the effects of mefloquine on travelers receiving comedication, particularly diabetics or patients using anticoagulants, should be checked before departure.
in clinical trials, the concomitant administration of sulfadoxine and pyrimethamine did not alter the adverse reaction profile.
folic acid in large amounts may counteract the antiepileptic effect of phenobarbital, phenytoin and primidone, and increase the frequency of seizures in susceptible pediatric patients.
preliminary animal and human studies have shown that small quantities of systemically administered leucovorin enter the csf primarily as 5-methyltetrahydro-folate and, in humans, remain 1 to 3 orders of magnitude lower than the usual methotrexate concentrations following intrathecal administration.
however, high doses of leucovorin may reduce the efficacy of intrathecally administered methotrexate.
leucovorin may enhance the toxicity of 5-fluorouracil.
phospholine iodide potentiates other cholinesterase inhibitors such as succinylcholine or organophosphate and carbamate insecticides.
aprepitant has been shown to induce the metabolism of s(-) warfarin and tolbutamide, which are metabolized through cyp2c9.
coadministration of aprepitant with these drugs or other drugs that are known to be metabolized by cyp2c9, such as phenytoin, may result in lower plasma concentrations of these drugs.
aprepitant is unlikely to interact with drugs that are substrates for the p-glycoprotein transporter, as demonstrated by the lack of interaction of aprepitant with digoxin in a clinical drug interaction study.
5-ht3 antagonists: in clinical drug interaction studies, aprepitant did not have clinically important effects on the pharmacokinetics of ondansetron or granisetron.
corticosteroids: dexamethasone: aprepitant, when given as a regimen of 125mg with dexamethasone coadministered orally as 20 mg on day 1, and aprepitant when given as 80 mg/day with dexamethasone coadministered orally as 8 mg on days 2 through 5, increased the auc of dexamethasone, a cyp3a4 substrate by 2.2-fold, on days 1 and 5.
the oral dexamethasone doses should be reduced by approximately 50% when coadministered with aprepitant, to achieve exposures of dexamethasone similar to those obtained when it is given without aprepitant.
the daily dose of dexamethasone administered in clinical studies with aprepitant reflects an approximate 50% reduction of the dose of dexamethasone.
aprepitant, when given as a regimen of 125 mg on day 1 and 80 mg/day on days 2 and 3, increased the auc of methylprednisolone, a cyp3a4 substrate, by 1.34-fold on day 1 and by 2.5-fold on day 3, when methylprednisolone was coadministered intravenously as 125 mg on day 1 and orally as 40 mg on days 2 and 3.
the iv methylprednisolone dose should be reduced by approximately 25%, and the oral methylprednisolone dose should be reduced by approximately 50% when coadministered with aprepitant to achieve exposures of methylprednisolone similar to those obtained when it is given without aprepitant.
warfarin: a single 125-mg dose of aprepitant was administered on day 1 and 80 mg/day on days 2 and 3 to healthy subjects who were stabilized on chronic warfarin therapy.
although there was no effect of aprepitant on the plasma auc of r(+) or s(-) warfarin determined on day 3, there was a 34% decrease in s(-)warfarin (a cyp2c9 substrate) trough concentration accompanied by a 14% decrease in the prothrombin time (reported as international normalized ratio or inr) 5 days after completion of dosing with aprepitant.
in patients on chronic warfarin therapy, the prothrombin time (inr) should be closely monitored in the 2-week period, particularly at 7 to 10 days, following initiation of the 3-day regimen of aprepitant with each chemotherapy cycle.
tolbutamide: aprepitant, when given as 125 mg on day 1 and 80 mg/day on days 2 and 3, decreased the auc of tolbutamide (a cyp2c9 substrate) by 23% on day 4, 28% on day 8, and 15% on day 15, when a single dose of tolbutamide 500 mg was admini,stered orally prior to the administration of the 3-day regimen of aprepitant and on days 4,8, and 15.
oral contraceptives: aprepitant, when given once daily for 14 days as a 100-mg capsule with an oral contraceptive containing 35 mcg of ethinyl estradiol and 1 mg of norethindrone, decreased the auc of ethinyl estradiol by 43%, and decreased the auc of norethindrone by 8%;
therefore, the efficacy of oral contraceptives during administration of aprepitant may be reduced.
although a 3-day regimen of aprepitant given concomitantly with oral contraceptives has not been studied, alternative or back-up methods of contraception should be used.
midazolam: aprepitant increased the auc of midazolam, a sensitive cyp3a4 substrate, by 2.3-fold on day 1 and 3.3-fold on day 5, when a single oral dose of midazolam 2 mg was coadministered on day 1 and day 5 of a regimen of aprepitant 125 mg on day 1 and 80 mg/day on days 2 through 5.
the potential effects of increased plasma concentrations of midazolam or other benzodiazepines metabolized via cyp3a4 (alprazolam, triazolam) should be considered when coadministering these agents with aprepitant.
in another study with intravenous administration of midazolam, aprepitant was given as 125 mg on day 1 and 80 mg/day on days 2 and 3, and midazolam 2 mg iv was given prior to the administration of the 3-day regimen of aprepitant and on days 4, 8, and 15.
aprepitant increased the auc of midazolam by 25% on day 4 and decreased the auc of midazolam by 19% on day 8 relative to the dosing of aprepitant on days 1 through 3.
therefore, coadministration of aprepitant with drugs that inhibit cyp3a4 activity may result in increased plasma concentrations of aprepitant.
consequently, concomitant administration of aprepitant with strong cyp3a4 inhibitors (e.g., ketoconazole, itraconazole, nefazodone, troleandomycin, clarithromycin, ritonavir, nelfinavir) should be approached with caution.
because moderate cyp3a4 inhibitors (e.g., diltiazem) result in 2-fold increase in plasma concentrations of aprepitant, concomitant administration should also be approached with caution.
therefore, coadministration of aprepitant with drugs that strongly induce cyp3a4 activity (e.g., rifampin, carbamazepine, phenytoin) may result in reduced plasma concentrations of aprepitant that may result in decreased efficacy of aprepitant.
ketoconazole: when a single 125-mg dose of aprepitant was administered on day5 of a
ketoconazole: when a single 125-mg dose of aprepitant was administered on day5 of a 10-day regimen of 400 mg/day of ketoconazole, a strong cyp3a4 inhibitor, the auc of aprepitant increased approximately 5-fold and the mean terminal half-life of aprepitant increased approximately 3-fold.
rifampin: when a single 375-mg dose of aprepitant was administered on day9 of a 14-day regimen of 600 mg/day of rifampin, a strong cyp3a4 inducer, the auc of aprepitant decreased approximately 11-fold and the mean terminal half-life decreased approximately 3-fold.
coadministration of aprepitant with drugs that induce cyp3a4 activity may result in reduced plasma concentrations and decreased efficacy of aprepitant.
diltiazem: in patients with mild to moderate hypertension, administration of aprepitant once daily, as a tablet formulation comparable to 230 mg of the capsule formulation, with diltiazem 120 mg 3 times daily for 5 days, resulted in a 2-fold increase of aprepitant auc and a simultaneous 1.7-fold increase of diltiazem auc.
paroxetine: coadministration of once daily doses of aprepitant, as a tablet formulation comparable to 85 mg or 170 mg of the capsule formulation, with paroxetine 20 mg once daily, resulted in a decrease in auc by approximately 25% and cmax, by approximately 20% of both aprepitant and paroxetine.
elevated plasma levels of theophylline have been reported with concomitant quinolone use.
there have been reports of theophylline-related side effects in patients on concomitant therapy with quinolones and theophylline.
therefore, monitoring of theophylline plasma levels should be considered and dosage of theophylline adjusted, as required.
quinolones have been shown to interfere with the metabolism of caffeine.
quinolones, including nalidixic acid, may enhance the effects of the oral anticoagulant warfarin or its derivatives.
nitrofurantoin interferes with the therapeutic action of nalidixic acid.
antacids containing magnesium, aluminum, or calcium;
sucralfate or divalent or trivalent cations such as iron;
multivitamins containing zinc;
and videx , (didanosine), chewable/buffered tablets or the pediatric powder for oral solution may substantially interfere with the absorption of quinolones, resulting in systemic levels considerably lower than desired.
elevated serum levels of cyclosporine have been reported with the concomitant use of some quinolones and cyclosporine.
therefore, cyclosporine serum levels should be monitored and appropriate cyclosporine dosage adjustments made when these drugs are used concomitantly.
the vasodilating effects of nitroglycerin may be additive with those of other vasodilators.
marked symptomatic orthostatic hypotension has been reported when calcium channel blockers and organic nitrates were used in combination.
no significant drug-drug pharmacokinetic (or pharmacodynamic) interactions have been found in interaction studies with hydrochlorothiazide, digoxin, warfarin, and nifedipine.
in vitro studies show significant inhibition of the formation of oxidized irbesartan metabolites with the known cytochrome cyp 2c9 substrates/inhibitors sulphenazole, tolbutamide and nifedipine.
however, in clinical studies the consequences of concomitant irbesartan on the pharmacodynamics of warfarin were negligible.
in separate studies of patients receiving maintenance doses of warfarin, hydrochlorothiazide, or digoxin, irbesartan administration for 7 days had no effect on the pharmacodynamics of warfarin (prothrombin time) or pharmacokinetics of digoxin.
the pharmacokinetics of irbesartan were not affected by coadministration of nifedipine or hydrochlorothiazide
may interact with cefamandole naftate, cephalothin sodium, magnesium sulfate, prednisolone sodium succinate, and prochlorperazine edisylate.
may interact with thyroid medication (e.g., levothyroxine), iodine-containing products, antacids, h2-antagonists (e.g., famotidine, ranitidine), and proton pump inhibitors (e.g., lansoprazole, omeprazole).
the possibility of increased interaction should be kept in mind when orudis doses greater than 50 mg as a single dose or 200 mg of ketoprofen per day are used concomitantly with highly bound drugs.
antacids: concomitant administration of magnesium hydroxide and aluminum hydroxide does not interfere with the rate or extent of the absorption of ketoprofen administered as orudis.
aspirin: ketoprofen does not alter aspirin absorption;
however, in a study of 12 normal subjects, concurrent administration of aspirin decreased ketoprofen protein binding and increased ketoprofen plasma clearance from 0.07 l/kg/h without aspirin to 0.11 l/kg/h with aspirin.
therefore, concurrent use of aspirin and ketoprofen is not recommended.
diuretic: hydrochlorothiazide, given concomitantly with ketoprofen, produces a reduction in urinary potassium and chloride excretion compared to hydrochlorothiazide alone.
digoxin: in a study in 12 patients with congestive heart failure where ketoprofen and digoxin were concomitantly administered, ketoprofen did not alter the serum levels of digoxin.
warfarin: in a short-term controlled study in 14 normal volunteers, ketoprofen did not significantly interfere with the effect of warfarin on prothrombin time.
bleeding from a number of sites may be a complication of warfarin treatment and gi bleeding a complication of ketoprofen treatment.
because prostaglandina play an important role in hemostasis and ketoprofen has an effect on platelet function as well, concurent therapy with ketoprofen and warfarin requires close monitoring of patients on both drugs.
probenecid: probenecid increases both free and bound ketoprofen by reducing the plasma clearance of ketoprofen to about one-third, as well as decreasing its protein binding.
therefore, the combination of ketoprofen and probenecid is not recommended.
methotrexate: ketoprofen, like other nsaids, may cause changes in the elimination of methotrexate leading to elevated serum levels of the drug and increased toxicity.
lithium: nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents have been reported to increase steadystate plasma lithium levels.
it is recommended that plasma lithium levels be monitored when ketoprofen is coadministered with lithium.
standard therapy includes antibiotics, such as penicillin and gentamicin;
vasopressors, such as dopamine and isoproterenol;
and diuretics, such as furosemide.
caverject: the potential for pharmacokinetic drug-drug interactions between alprostadil and other agents has not been formally studied.
probenecid    prolonged action of etomidate
zimelidine    etomidate antagonism
aminophylline     etomidate antagonism
interactions for vitamin d analogues (vitamin d2, vitamin d3, calcitriol, and calcidiol): cholestyramine: cholestyramine has been reported to reduce intestinal absorption of fat soluble vitamins;
phenytoin/phenobarbital: the coadministration of phenytoin or phenobarbital will not affect plasma concentrations of vitamin d, but may reduce endogenous plasma levels of calcitriol/ergocalcitriol by accelerating metabolism.
since blood level of calcitriol/ergocalcitriol will be reduced, higher doses of rocaltrol may be necessary if these drugs are administered simultaneously.
thiazides: thiazides are known to induce hypercalcemia by the reduction of calcium excretion in urine.
some reports have shown that the concomitant administration of thiazides with vitamin d causes hypercalcemia.
digitalis: vitamin d dosage must be determined with care in patients undergoing treatment with digitalis, as hypercalcemia in such patients may precipitate cardiac arrhythmias.
ketoconazole: ketoconazole may inhibit both synthetic and catabolic enzymes of vitamin d.
however, in vivo drug interaction studies of ketoconazole with vitamin d have not been investigated.
corticosteroids: a relationship of functional antagonism exists between vitamin d analogues, which promote calcium absorption, and corticosteroids, which inhibit calcium absorption.
vitamin d: the coadministration of any of the vitamin d analogues should be avoided as this could create possible additive effects and hypercalcemia.
calcium supplements: uncontrolled intake of additional calcium-containing preparations should be avoided.
magnesium: magnesium-containing preparations (eg, antacids) may cause hypermagnesemia and should therefore not be taken during therapy with vitamin d by patients on chronic renal dialysis.
warfarin: concomitant administration of daptomycin (6 mg/kg once every 24 hours for 5 days) and warfarin (25 mg single oral dose) had no significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of either drug, and the inr was not significantly altered.
hmg-coa reductase inhibitors: inhibitors of hmg-coa reductase may cause myopathy, which is manifested as muscle pain or weakness associated with elevated levels of cpk.
there were no reports of skeletal myopathy in a placebo-controlled phase i trial in which 10 healthy subjects on stable simvastatin therapy were treated concurrently with daptomycin (4 mg/kg once every 24 hours) for 14 days.
experience with co-administration of hmg-coa reductase inhibitors and fentanyl in patients is limited,therefore,consideration should be given to temporarily suspending use of hmg-coa reductase inhibitors in patients receiving fentanyl.
ethoxzolamide may increase the action of tricyclics, amphetamines, procainamide, and quinidine.
it may increase excretion of barbiturates, lithium, and asa and may also increase the toxicity of salicylates.
coadministration of ethoxzolamide with other diuretics, amphotericin b, and corticosteroids may cause hypokalemia.
raptiva should not be used with other immunosuppressive drugs.
acellular, live and live-attenuated vaccines should not be administered during raptiva treatment.
the administration of local anesthetic solutions containing epinephrine or norepinephrine to patients receiving monoamine oxidase inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants or phenothiazines may produce severe, prolonged hypotension or hypertension.
concurrent administration of vasopressor drugs (for the treatment of hypotension related to obstetric blocks) and ergot-type oxytocic drugs may cause severe, persistent hypertension or cerebrovascular accidents.
therefore, chloroprocaine should not be used in any condition in which a sulfonamide drug is being employed.
cimetidine (400 mg b.i.d.) had no effect on vardenafil bioavailability (auc) and maximum concentration (cmax) of vardenafil when co-administered with 20 mg vardenafil in healthy volunteers.
erythromycin (500 mg t.i.d) produced a 4-fold increase in vardenafil auc and a 3-fold increase in cmax when co-administered with vardenafil 5 mg in healthy volunteers.
it is recommended not to exceed a single 5 mg dose of vardenafil in a 24-hour period when used in combination with erythromycin.
ketoconazole (200 mg once daily) produced a 10-fold increase in vardenafil auc and a 4-fold increase in cmax when co-administered with vardenafil (5 mg) in healthy volunteers.
a 5-mg vardenafil dose should not be exceeded when used in combination with 200 mg once daily ketoconazole.
since higher doses of ketoconazole (400 mg daily) may result in higher increases in cmax and auc, a single 2.5 mg dose of vardenafil should not be exceeded in a 24-hour period when used in combination with ketoconazole 400 mg daily.
hiv protease inhibitors: indinavir (800 mg t.i.d.) co-administered with vardenafil 10 mg resulted in a 16-fold increase in vardenafil auc, a 7-fold increase in vardenafil cmax and a 2-fold increase in vardenafil half-life.
it is recommended not to exceed a single 2.5 mg vardenafil dose in a 24-hour period when used in combination with indinavir.
ritonavir (600 mg b.i.d.) co-administered with vardenafil 5 mg resulted in a 49-fold increase in vardenafil auc and a 13-fold increase in vardenafil cmax.
the interaction is a consequence of blocking hepatic metabolism of vardenafil by ritonavir, a highly potent cyp3a4 inhibitor, which also inhibits cyp2c9.
ritonavir significantly prolonged the half-life of vardenafil to 26 hours.
consequently, it is recommended not to exceed a single 2.5 mg vardenafil dose in a 72-hour period when used in combination with ritonavir.
other drug interactions: no pharmacokinetic interactions were observed between vardenafil and the following drugs: glyburide, warfarin, digoxin, maalox, and ranitidine.
in the warfarin study, vardenafil had no effect on the prothrombin time or other pharmacodynamic parameters.
in vivo studies: nitrates: the blood pressure lowering effects of sublingual nitrates (0.4 mg) taken 1 and 4 hours after vardenafil and increases in heart rate when taken at 1, 4 and 8 hours were potentiated by a 20 mg dose of vardenafil in healthy middle-aged subjects.
these effects were not observed when vardenafil 20 mg was taken 24 hours before the ntg.
potentiation of the hypotensive effects of nitrates for patients with ischemic heart disease has not been evaluated, and concomitant use of vardenafil and nitrates is contraindicated.
nifedipine: vardenafil 20 mg, when co-administered with slow-release nifedipine 30 mg or 60 mg once daily, did not affect the relative bioavailability (auc) or maximum concentration (cmax) of nifedipine, a drug that is metabolized via cyp3a4.
nifedipine did not alter the plasma levels of vardenafil when taken in combination.
in these patients whose hypertension was controlled with nifedipine, vardenafil 20 mg produced mean additional supine systolic/diastolic blood pressure reductions of 6/5 mm hg compared to placebo.
alpha-blockers: when vardenafil 10 or 20 mg was given to healthy volunteers either simultaneously or 6 hours after a 10 mg dose of terazosin, significant hypotension developed in a substantial number of subjects.
with simultaneous dosing of vardenafil 10 mg and terazosin 10 mg, 6 of 8 subjects experienced a standing systolic blood pressure of less than 85 mm hg.
with simultaneous dosing of vardenafil 20 mg and terazosin 10 mg, 2 of 9 subjects experienced a standing systolic blood pressure of less than 85 mm hg.
when vardenafil dosing was separated from terazosin 10 mg by 6 hours, 7 of 28 subjects who received 20 mg of vardenafil experienced a decrease in standing systolic blood pressure below 85 mm hg.
in a similar study with tamsulosin in healthy volunteers, 1 of 24 subjects dosed with vardenafil 20 mg and tamsulosin 0.4 mg separated by 6 hours experienced a standing systolic blood pressure below 85 mm hg.
two of 16 subjects dosed simultaneously with vardenafil 10 mg and tamsulosin 0.4 mg experienced a standing systolic blood pressure below 85 mm hg.
the administration of lower doses of vardenafil with alpha-blockers has not been completely evaluated to determine if they can be safely administered together.
based on these data, vardenafil should not be used in patients on alpha-blocker therapy.
ritonavir and indinavir: upon concomitant administration of 5 mg of vardenafil with 600 mg bid ritonavir, the cmax and auc of ritonavir were reduced by approximately 20%.
upon administration of 10 mg of vardenafil with 800 mg tid indinavir, the cmax and auc of indinavir were reduced by 40% and 30%, respectively.
alcohol: alcohol (0.5 g/kg body weight: approximately 40 ml of absolute alcohol in a 70 kg person) and vardenafil plasma levels were not altered when dosed simultaneously.
vardenafil (20 mg) did not potentiate the hypotensive effects of alcohol during the 4-hour observation period in healthy volunteers when administered with alcohol (0.5 g/kg body weight).
aspirin: vardenafil (10 mg and 20 mg) did not potentiate the increase in bleeding time caused by aspirin (two 81 mg tablets).
other interactions: vardenafil had no effect on the pharmacodynamics of glyburide (glucose and insulin concentrations) and warfarin (prothrombin time or other pharmacodynamic parameters).
concurrent administration of oxyphenbutazone and androgens may result in elevated serum levels of oxyphenbutazone.
in diabetic patients, the metabolic effects of androgens may decrease blood glucose and therefore, insulin requirements.
clinical trials have indicated that pulmozyme can be effectively and safely used in conjunction with standard cystic fibrosis therapies including oral, inhaled and/or parenteral antibiotics, bronchodilators, enzyme supplements, vitamins, oral or inhaled corticosteroids, and analgesics.
other binding proteins may be elevated in serum, i.e., corticosteroid binding globulin (cbg), sex hormone-binding globulin (shbg), leading to increased total circulating corticosteroids and sex steroids, respectively.
drugs that induce cyp3a4 activity would be expected to increase the clearance of indinavir, resulting in lowered plasma concentrations of indinavir.
coadministration of crixivan and other drugs that inhibit cyp3a4 may decrease the clearance of indinavir and may result in increased plasma concentrations of indinavir.
antiarrhythmics: amiodarone
ergot derivatives: dihydroergotamine, ergonovine, ergotamine, methylergonovine
sedative/hypnotics: midazolam, triazolam
neuroleptic: pimozide
may lead to loss of virologic response and possible resistance to crixivan or to the class of protease inhibitors.
antimycobacterial: rifampin
may lead to loss of virologic response and possible resistance to crixivan or to the class of protease inhibitors or other coadministered antiretroviral agents.
hmg-coa reductase inhibitors: lovastatin, simvastatin
protease inhibitor: atazanavir
both crixivan and atazanavir are associated with indirect (unconjugated) hyperbilirubinemia.
combinations of these drugs have not been studied and coadministration of crixivan and atazanavir is not recommended.
dose reduction of crixivan to 600 mg every 8 hours should be considered when taking delavirdine 400 mg three times a day.
indinavir and didanosine formulations containing buffer should be administered at least one hour apart on an empty stomach.
the optimal dose of indinavir, when given in combination with efavirenz, is not known.
increasing the indinavir dose to 1000 mg every 8 hours does not compensate for the increased indinavir metabolism due to efavirenz.
indinavir concentrations may be decreased in the presence of nevirapine.
indinavir concentration   ritonavir concentration
preliminary clinical data suggest that the incidence of nephrolithiasis is higher in patients receiving indinavir in combination with ritonavir than those receiving crixivan 800 mg q8h.
antiarrhythmics: bepridil, lidocaine (systemic) and quinidine
caution is warranted and therapeutic concentration monitoring is recommended for antiarrhythmics when coadministered with crixivan.
anticonvulsants: carbamazepine, phenobarbital, phenytoin
crixivan may not be effective due to decreased indinavir concentrations in patients taking these agents concomitantly.
calcium channel blockers, dihydropyridine: e.g., felodipine, nifedipine, nicardipine
clarithromycin concentration   indinavir concentration
hmg-coa reductase inhibitor: atorvastatin
use lowest possible dose of atorvastatin with careful monitoring, or consider hmg-coa reductase inhibitors that are not primarily metabolized by cyp3a4, such as pravastatin, fluvastatin, or rosuvastatin in combination with crixivan.
immunosuppressants: cyclosporine, tacrolimus, sirolimus
dose reduction of crixivan to 600 mg every 8 hours is recommended when administering itraconazole concurrently.
indinavir concentration   rifabutin concentration
dose reduction of rifabutin to half the standard dose and a dose increase of crixivan to 1000 mg (three 333-mg capsules) every 8 hours are recommended when rifabutin and crixivan are coadministered.
sildenafil dose should not exceed a maximum of 25 mg in a 48- hour period in patients receiving concomitant indinavir therapy.
tadalafil dose should not exceed a maximum of 10 mg in a 72- hour period in patients receiving concomitant indinavir therapy.
vardenafil dose should not exceed a maximum of 2.5 mg in a 24-hour period in patients receiving concomitant indinavir therapy.
due to a theoretical risk of a pharmacodynamic interaction, use of ergotamine-containing or ergot-type medications (like dihydroergotamine or methysergide) and frova within 24 hours of each other should be avoided (see  a href= frova_od.htm#ci contraindications).
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (ssris) (e.g., fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine, sertraline) have been reported, rarely, to cause weakness, hyperreflexia, and incoordination when coadministered with 5-ht1 agonists.
if concomitant treatment with frovatriptan and an ssri is clinically warranted, appropriate observation of the patient is advised.
no clinically significant adverse interactions with commonly used preanesthetic drugs, or drugs used during anesthesia (muscle relaxants, intravenous agents, and local anesthetic agents) were reported in clinical trials.
like isoflurane, desflurane does not predispose to premature ventricular arrhythmias in the presence of exogenously infused epinephrine in swine.
hypertensive crises have resulted when sympathomimetic amines have been used concomitantly within14 days following use of monoamine oxidase inhibitors.
didrex should not be used concomitantly with other cns stimulants.
amphetamines may decrease the hypotensive effect of antihypertensives.
amphetamines may enhance the effects of tricyclic antidepressants.
urinary acidifying agents decrease blood levels and increase excretion of amphetamines.
since hydroxyurea may raise the serum uric acid level, dosage adjustment of uricosuric medication may be necessary
disulfiram should be used with caution in those patients reveiving phenytoin and its congeners.
since the concomitant administration of these two drugs can lead to phenytoin intoxication, prior to administering disulfiram to a patient on phenytoin therapy, a baseline phenytoin serum level should be obtained.
it may be necessary to adjust the dosage of oral anticoagulants upon beginning or stopping disulfiram. since disulfiram may prolong prothrombin time.
patients taking isoniazid when disulfiram is given should be observed for the appearance of unsteady gait or marked changes in mental status;
in rats, simultaneous ingestion of disulfiram and nitrite in the diet for 78 weeks has been reported to cause tumors, and it has been suggested that disulfiram may react with nitrites in the rat stomach to form a nitrosamine, which is tumorigenic.
if additional adrenergic drugs are to be administered by any route, they should be used with caution because the pharmacologically predictable sympathetic effects of brovana may be potentiated.
when paroxetine, a potent inhibitor of cyp2d6, was co-administered with brovana at steady-state, exposure to either drug was not altered.
concomitant treatment with methylxanthines (aminophylline, theophylline), steroids, or diuretics may potentiate any hypokalemic effect of adrenergic agonists.
the ecg changes and/or hypokalemia that may result from the administration of non-potassium sparing diuretics (such as loop or thiazide diuretics) can be acutely worsened by beta-agonists, especially when the recommended dose of the beta-agonist is exceeded.
although the clinical significance of these effects is not known, caution is advised in the co-administration of beta-agonists with non-potassium sparing diuretics.
brovana, as with other beta2-agonists, should be administered with extreme caution to patients being treated with monoamine oxidase inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants, or drugs known to prolong the qtc interval because the action of adrenergic agonists on the cardiovascular system may be potentiated by these agents.
the concurrent use of intravenously or orally administered methylxanthines (e.g., aminophylline, theophylline) by patients receiving brovana has not been completely evaluated.
in two combined 12-week placebo controlled trials that included brovana doses of 15 mcg twice daily, 25 mcg twice daily, and 50 mcg once daily, 54 of 873 brovana -treated subjects received concomitant theophylline at study entry.
in a 12-month controlled trial that included a 50 mcg once daily brovana dose, 30 of the 528 brovana -treated subjects received concomitant theophylline at study entry.
beta-adrenergic receptor antagonists (beta-blockers) and brovana may interfere with the effect of each other when administered concurrently.
beta-blockers not only block the therapeutic effects of beta-agonists, but may produce severe bronchospasm in copd patients.
dostinex should not be administered concurrently with d2-antagonists, such as phenothiazines, butyrophenones, thioxanthines, or metoclopramide.
interactions for vitamin b3 (niacin): antihypertensive therapy: nicotinic acid may potentiate the effects of ganglionic blocking agents and vasoactive drugs resulting in postural hypotension.
aspirin: concomitant aspirin may decrease the metabolic clearance of nicotinic acid.
since entecavir is primarily eliminated by the kidneys, coadministration of baraclude with drugs that reduce renal function or compete for active tubular secretion may increase serum concentrations of either entecavir or the coadministered drug.
coadministration of entecavir with lamivudine, adefovir dipivoxil,or tenofovir disoproxil fumarate did not result in significant drug interactions.
the effects of coadministration of baraclude with other drugs that are renally eliminated or are known to affect renal function have not been evaluated, and patients should be monitored closely for adverse events when baraclude is coadministered with such drugs.
caution is advised when trisenox is coadministered with other medications that can prolong the qt interval (e.g. certain antiarrhythmics or thioridazine) or lead to electrolyte abnormalities (such as diuretics or amphotericin b).
mao inhibitors prolong and intensify the anticholinergic effects of antihistamines.
antihistamines may have additive effects with alcohol and other cns depressants, e.g., hypnotics, sedatives, tranquilizers, antianxiety agents.
addition or deletion of any drug from the therapeutic regimen of patients receiving oral anticoagulants may affect patient response to the anticoagulant.
for example, since cholestyramine may reduce the gastrointestinal absorption of both the oral anticoagulants and vitamin k, the net effects are unpredictable.
chloral hydrate may cause an increased prothrombin response by displacing the anticoagulant from protein binding sites or a diminished prothrombin response through increased metabolism of the unbound drug by hepatic enzyme induction, thus leading to inter-patient variation in ultimate prothrombin effect.
drugs that have been reported to diminish oral anticoagulant response, ie, decreased prothrom-bin time response, in man significantly include: adrenocortical steroids;
drugs that have been reported to diminish oral anticoagulant response, ie, decreased prothrom-bin time response, in man significantly include: adrenocortical steroids;alcohol*;antacids;antihistamines;barbiturates;carbamazepine;chloral hydrate*;chlordiazepoxide;cholestyramine;diet high in vitamin k;diuretics*;ethchlorvynol;glutethimide;griseofulvin;haloperidol;meprobamate;oral contraceptives;paraldehyde;primidone;ranitidine*;rifampin;unreliable prothrombin time determinations;vitamin c;warfarin sodium under-dosage.
drugs that reportedly may increase oral anticoagulant response, ie, increased prothrombin response, in man include:alcohol*;
salicylates;sulfinpyrazone;
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole;
drugs that reportedly may increase oral anticoagulant response, ie, increased prothrombin response, in man include:alcohol*;allopurinol;aminosalicylic acid;amiodarone;anabolic steroids;antibiotics;bromelains;chloral hydrate*;chlorpropamide;chymotrypsin;cimetidine;cinchophen;clofibrate;dextran;dextrothyroxine;diazoxide;dietary deficiencies;diflunisal;disulfiram;drugs affecting blood elements;ethacrynic acid;fenoprofen;glucagon;hepatotoxic drugs;ibuprofen;indomethacin;influenza virus vaccine;inhalation anesthetics;mefenamic acid;methyldopa;methylphenidate;metronidazole;miconazole;monoamine oxidase inhibitors;nalidixic acid;naproxen;oxolinic acid;oxyphenbutazone;pentoxifylline;phenylbutazone;phenyramidol;phenytoin;prolonged hot weather;prolonged narcotics;pyrazolones;quinidine;quinine;ranitidine*;salicylates;sulfinpyrazone;sulfonamides, long acting;sulindac;thyroid drugs;tolbutamide;triclofos sodium;trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole;unreliable prothrombin time determinations;warfarin sodium overdosage.
oral anticoagulants may potentiate the hypoglycemic action of hypoglycemic agents, eg, tolbutamide and chlorpropamide, by inhibiting their metabolism in the liver.
because oral anticoagulants may interfere with the hepatic metabolism of phenytoin, toxic levels of the anticonvulsant may occur when an oral anticoagulant and phenytoin are administered concurrently.
drugs that reduce the number of blood platelets by causing bone marrow depression (such as antineoplastic agents) or drugs which inhibit platelet function (eg, aspirin and other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, dipyridamole, hydrochloroquine, clofibrate, dextran) may increase the bleeding tendency produced by anticoagulants without altering prothrombin time determinations.
the beneficial effects on arterial thrombus formation from combined therapy with antiplatelet and anticoagulant medication must be weighed against an increased risk of inducing hemorrhage.
drug/laboratory test interferences: dicumarol and indanedione anticoagulants, including anisindione, or their metabolites may color alkaline urine red-orange, which may interfere with spectrophotometrically determined urinary laboratory tests.
anesthetics/sedatives/hypnotics/opioids: co-administration of precedex with anesthetics, sedatives, hypnotics, and opioids is likely to lead to an enhancement of effects.
specific studies have confirmed these effects with sevoflurane, isoflurane, propofol, alfentanil, and midazolam.
no pharmacokinetic interactions between dexmedetomidine and isoflurane, propofol, alfentanil, and midazolam have been demonstrated.
however, due to possible pharmacodynamic interactions, when co-administered with precedex, a reduction in dosage of precedex on the concomitant anesthetic, sedative, hypnotic or opioid may be required.
neuromuscular blockers: in one study of 10 healthy volunteers, administration of precedex for 45 minutes at a plasma concentration of 1 (one) ng/ml resulted in no clinically meaningful increases in the magnitude or neuromuscular blockade associated with rocuronium administration.
mineral oil interferes with the absorption of fat-soluble vitamins, including vitamin d preparations.
administration of thiazide diuretics to hypoparathyroid patients who are concurrently being treated with ergocalciferol may cause hypercalcemia.
zidovudine: there is no significant pharmacokinetic interaction between zdv and zalcitabine which has been confirmed clinically.
zalcitabine also has no significant effect on the intracellular phosphorylation of zdv, as shown in vitro in peripheral blood mononuclear cells or in two other cell lines (u937 and molt-4).
in the same study it was shown that didanosine and stavudine had no significant effect on the intracellular phosphorylation of zalcitabine in peripheral blood mononuclear cells.
lamivudine: in vitro studies in peripheral blood mononuclear cells, u937 and molt-4 cells revealed that lamivudine significantly inhibited zalcitabine phosphorylation in a dose dependent manner.
zalcitabine inhibited lamivudine phosphorylation at high concentration ratios (10 and 100);
however, it is considered to be unlikely that this decrease of phosphorylated lamivudine concentration is of clinical significance, as lamivudine is a more efficient substrate for deoxycytidine kinase than zalcitabine.
these in vitro studies suggest that concomitant administration of zalcitabine and lamivudine in humans may result in sub-therapeutic concentrations of active phosphorylated zalcitabine, which may lead to a decreased antiretroviral effect of zalcitabine.
concomitant use of zalcitabine and lamivudine is not recommended.
saquinavir: the combination of hivid, saquinavir, and zdv has been studied (as triple combination) in adults.
drugs that have been associated with peripheral neuropathy include antiretroviral nucleoside analogues, chloramphenicol, cisplatin, dapsone, disulfiram, ethionamide, glutethimide, gold, hydralazine, iodoquinol, isoniazid, metronidazole, nitrofurantoin, phenytoin, ribavirin, and vincristine.
concomitant use of hivid with didanosine is not recommended.
intravenous pentamidine: treatment with hivid should be interrupted when the use of a drug that has the potential to cause pancreatitis is required.
death due to fulminant pancreatitis possibly related to intravenous pentamidine and hivid has been reported.
if intravenous pentamidine is required to treat pneumocystis carinii pneumonia, treatment with hivid should be interrupted.
amphotericin, foscarnet, and aminoglycosides: drugs such as amphotericin, foscarnet, and aminoglycosides may increase the risk of developing peripheral neuropathy or other hivid-associated adverse events by interfering with the renal clearance of zalcitabine (thereby raising systemic exposure).
probenecid or cimetidine: concomitant administration of probenecid or cimetidine decreases the elimination of zalcitabine, most likely by inhibition of renal tubular secretion of zalcitabine.
patients receiving these drugs in combination with zalcitabine should be monitored for signs of toxicity and the dose of zalcitabine reduced if warranted.
magnesium/aluminum-containing antacid products: absorption of zalcitabine is moderately reduced (approximately 25%) when coadministered with magnesium/aluminum-containing antacid products.
the clinical significance of this reduction is not known, hence zalcitabine is not recommended to be ingested simultaneously with magnesium/aluminum-containing antacids.
metoclopramide: bioavailability is mildly reduced (approximately 10%) when zalcitabine and metoclopramide are coadministered.
doxorubicin: doxorubicin caused a decrease in zalcitabine phosphorylation ( 50% inhibition of total phosphate formation) in u937/molt 4 cells.
tagamet, apparently through an effect on certain microsomal enzyme systems, has been reported to reduce the hepatic metabolism of warfarin-type anticoagulants, phenytoin, propranolol, nifedipine, chlordiazepoxide, diazepam, certain tricyclic antidepressants, lidocaine, theophylline and metronidazole, thereby delaying elimination and increasing blood levels of these drugs.
therefore, close monitoring of prothrombin time is recommended, and adjustment of the anticoagulant dose may be necessary when tagamet is administered concomitantly.
interaction with phenytoin, lidocaine and theophylline has also been reported to produce adverse clinical effects.
however, a crossover study in healthy subjects receiving either tagamet 300 mg q.i.d. or 800 mg h.s. concomitantly with a 300 mg b.i.d. dosage of theophylline (theo-dur , key pharmaceuticals, inc.) demonstrated less alteration in steady-state theophylline peak serum levels with the 800 mg h.s. regimen, particularly in subjects aged 54 years and older.
cns-active drugs ethanol: sonata 10 mg potentiated the cns-impairing effects of ethanol 0.75 g/kg on balance testing and reaction time for 1 hour after ethanol administration and on the digit symbol substitution test (dsst), symbol copying test, and the variability component of the divided attention test for 2.5 hours after ethanol administration.
zaleplon did not affect the pharmacokinetics of ethanol.
imipramine: coadministration of single doses of sonata 20 mg and imipramine 75 mg produced additive effects on decreased alertness and impaired psychomotor performance for 2 to 4 hours after administration.
paroxetine: coadministration of a single dose of sonata 20 mg and paroxetine 20 mg daily for 7 days did not produce any interaction on psychomotor performance.
additionally, paroxetine did not alter the pharmacokinetics of sonata, reflecting the absence of a role of cyp2d6 in zaleplon s metabolism.
thioridazine: coadministration of single doses of sonata 20 mg and thioridazine 50 mg produced additive effects on decreased alertness and impaired psychomotor performance for 2 to 4 hours after administration.
venlafaxine: coadministration of a single dose of zaleplon 10 mg and multiple doses of venlafaxine er (extended release) 150 mg did not result in any significant changes in the pharmacokinetics of either zaleplon or venlafaxine.
in addition, there was no pharmacodynamic interaction as a result of coadministration of zaleplon and venlafaxine er.
promethazine: coadministration of a single dose of zaleplon and promethazine (10 and 25 mg, respectively) resulted in a 15% decrease in maximal plasma concentrations of zaleplon, but no change in the area under the plasma concentration-time curve.
however, the pharmacodynamics of coadministration of zaleplon and promethazine have not been evaluated.
drugs that induce cyp3a4 rifampin: cyp3a4 is ordinarily a minor metabolizing enzyme of zaleplon.
multiple-dose administration of the potent cyp3a4 inducer rifampin (600 mg every 24 hours, q24h, for 14 days), however, reduced zaleplon cmax and auc by approximately 80%.
an alternative non-cyp3a4 substrate hypnotic agent may be considered in patients taking cyp3a4 inducers such as rifampin, phenytoin, carbamazepine, and phenobarbital.
drugs that inhibit cyp3a4 cyp3a4 is a minor metabolic pathway for the elimination of zaleplon because the sum of desethylzaleplon (formed via cyp3a4 in vitro) and its metabolites, 5-oxo-desethylzaleplon and 5-oxo-desethylzaleplon glucuronide, account for only 9% of the urinary recovery of a zaleplon dose.
coadministration of single, oral doses of zaleplon with erythromycin (10 mg and 800 mg, respectively), a strong, selective cyp3a4 inhibitor produced a 34% increase in zaleplons maximal plasma concentrations and a 20% increase in the area under the plasma concentration-time curve.
other strong selective cyp3a4 inhibitors such as ketoconazole can also be expected to increase the exposure of zaleplon.
diphenhydramine: diphenhydramine is reported to be a weak inhibitor of aldehyde oxidase in rat liver, but its inhibitory effects in human liver are not known.
there is no pharmacokinetic interaction between zaleplon and diphenhydramine following the administration of a single dose (10 mg and 50 mg, respectively) of each drug.
drugs that inhibit both aldehyde oxidase and cyp3a4 cimetidine: cimetidine inhibits both aldehyde oxidase (in vitro) and cyp3a4 (in vitro and in vivo), the primary and secondary enzymes, respectively, responsible for zaleplon metabolism.
concomitant administration of sonata (10 mg) and cimetidine (800 mg) produced an 85% increase in the mean cmax and auc of zaleplon.
drugs with a narrow therapeutic index digoxin: sonata (10 mg) did not affect the pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic profile of digoxin (0.375 mg q24h for 8 days).
warfarin: multiple oral doses of sonata (20 mg q24h for 13 days) did not affect the pharmacokinetics of warfarin (r+)- or (s-)-enantiomers or the pharmacodynamics (prothrombin time) following a single 25-mg oral dose of warfarin.
drugs that alter renal excretion ibuprofen: ibuprofen is known to affect renal function and, consequently, alter the renal excretion of other drugs.
there was no apparent pharmacokinetic interaction between zaleplon and ibuprofen following single dose administration (10 mg and 600 mg, respectively) of each drug.
this was expected because zaleplon is primarily metabolized and renal excretion of unchanged zaleplon accounts for less than 1% of the administered dose.
zinecard does not influence the pharmacokinetics of doxorubicin.
no important interactions to date levosimendan does not have clinically important pharmacokinetic interactions with captopril, beta-blockers, felodipine, digoxin, warfarin, isosorbide mononitrate, carvedilol, ethanol or itraconazole.
oral anticoagulants: thyroid hormones appear to increase catabolism of vitamin k-dependent clotting factors.
patients stabilized on oral anticoagulants who are found to require thyroid replacement therapy should be watched very closely when thyroid is started.
insulin or oral hypoglycemics: initiating thyroid replacement therapy may cause increases in insulin or oral hypoglycemic requirements.
patients receiving insulin or oral hypoglycemics should be closely watched during initiation of thyroid replacement therapy.
cholestyramine: cholestyramine binds both t4 and t3 in the intestine, thus impairing absorption of these thyroid hormones.
therefore, 4 to 5 hours should elapse between administration of cholestyramine and thyroid hormones.
estrogen, oral contraceptives: estrogens tend to increase serum thyroxine-binding globulin (tbg).
in a patient with a nonfunctioning thyroid gland who is receiving thyroid replacement therapy, free levothyroxine may be decreased when estrogens are started thus increasing thyroid requirements.
therefore, patients without a functioning thyroid gland who are on thyroid replacement therapy may need to increase their thyroid dose if estrogens or estrogen-containing oral contraceptives are given.
tricyclic antidepressants: use of thyroid products with imipramine and other tricyclic antidepressants may increase receptor sensitivity and enhance antidepressant activity transient cardiac arrhythmias have been observed.
digitalis: thyroid preparations may potentiate the toxic effects of digitalis.
ketamine: when administered to patients on a thyroid preparation, this parenteral anesthetic may cause hypertension and tachycardia.
vasopressors: thyroxine increases the adrenergic effect of catecholamines such as epinephrine and norepinephrine.
drug/laboratory test interactions the following drugs or moieties are known to interfere with laboratory tests performed in patients on thyroid hormone therapy: androgens, corticosteroids, estrogens, oral contraceptives containing estrogens, iodine-containing preparations and the numerous preparations containing salicylates.
pregnancy estrogens and estrogen-containing oral contraceptives increase tbg concentrations.
decreases in tbg concentrations are observed in nephrosis, acromegaly and after androgen or corticosteroid therapy.
the hypoglycemic action of sulfonylureas may be potentiated by certain drugs including nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents and other drugs that are highly protein bound, salicylates, sulfonamides, chloramphenicol, probenecid, coumarins, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, and beta adrenergic blocking agents.
these drugs include the thiazides and other diuretics, corticosteroids, phe-nothiazines, thyroid products, estrogens, oral contraceptives, phenytoin, nicotinic acid, sympathomimet-ics, calcium channel blocking drugs, and isoniazid.
a possible interaction between glyburide and ciprofloxacin, a fluoroquinolone antibiotic, has been reported, resulting in a potentiation of the hypoglycemic action of glyburide.
a potential interaction between oral miconazole and oral hypoglycemic agents leading to severe hypoglycemia has been reported.
metformin: in a single-dose interaction study in niddm subjects, decreases in glyburide auc and cmax were observed, but were highly variable.
coadministration of gly-buride and metformin did not result in any changes in either metformin pharmacokinetics or pharmaco-dynamics.
the following are examples of substances that may increase the blood-glucose-lowering effect and susceptibility to hypoglycemia: oral antidiabetic products, ace inhibitors, disopyramide, fibrates, fluoxetine, monoamine oxidase (mao) inhibitors, propoxyphene, salicylates, somatostatin analog (e.g., octreotide), sulfonamide antibiotics.
the following are examples of substances that may reduce the blood-glucose-lowering effect: corticosteroids, niacin, danazol, diuretics, sympathomimetic agents (e.g., epinephrine, salbutamol, terbutaline), isoniazid, phenothiazine derivatives, somatropin, thyroid hormones, estrogens, progestogens (e.g., in oral contraceptives).
beta-blockers, clonidine, lithium salts, and alcohol may either potentiate or weaken the blood-glucose-lowering effect of insulin.
in addition, under the influence of sympatholytic medicinal products such as beta-blockers, clonidine, guanethidine, and reserpine, the signs of hypoglycemia may be reduced or absent.
a clinical study in healthy male volunteers (n=24) demonstrated that mixing novolog with nph human insulin immediately before injection produced some attenuation in the peak concentration of novolog, but that the time to peak and the total bioavailability of novolog were not significantly affected.
if novolog is mixed with nph human insulin, novolog should be drawn into the syringe first.
because there are no data on the compatibility of novolog and crystalline zinc insulin preparations, novolog should not be mixed with these preparations.
the effects of mixing novolog with insulins of animal source or insulin preparations produced by other manufacturers have not been studied .
when used in external subcutaneous infusion pumps for insulin, novolog should not be mixed with any other insulins or diluent.
caution should be exercised when anticoagulants are given in conjunction with atromid-s.
atromid-s may displace acidic drugs such as phenytoin or tolbutamide from their binding sites.
the hypoglycemic effect of tolbutamide has been reported to increase when atromid-s is given concurrently.
fulminant rhabdomyolysis has been seen as early as three weeks after initiation of combined therapy with another fibrate and lovastatin but may be seen after several months.
for these reasons, it is felt that, in most subjects who have had an unsatisfactory lipid response to either drug alone, the possible benefits of combined therapy with lovastatin and a fibrate do not outweigh the risks of severe myopathy, rhabdomyolysis, and acute renal failure.
while it is not known whether this interaction occurs with fibrates other than gemfibrozil, myopathy and rhabdomyolysis have occasionally been associated with the use of fibrates alone, including clofibrate.
therefore, the combined use of lovastatin with fibrates should generally be avoided.
in vitro studies have shown that precipitation occurs when eye drops containing thimerosal are mixed with latanoprost.
catecholamine-depleting drugs, such as reserpine, may have an additive effect when given with beta-blocking agents.
patients treated with acebutolol plus catecholamine depletors should, therefore, be observed closely for evidence of marked bradycardia or hypotension which may present as vertigo, syncope/presyncope, or orthostatic changes in blood pressure without compensatory tachycardia.
exaggerated hypertensive responses have been reported from the combined use of beta-adrenergic antagonists and alpha-adrenergic stimulants, including those contained in proprietary cold remedies and vasoconstrictive nasal drops.
blunting of the antihypertensive effect of beta-adrenoceptor blocking agents by nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs has been reported.
no significant interactions with digoxin, hydrochlorothiazide, hydralazine, sulfinpyrazone, oral contraceptives, tolbutamide, or warfarin have been observed.
a similar association, though less marked, has been suggested with barbiturates, phenylbutazone, phenytoin sodium, carbamazepine, griseofulvin, topiramate, and possibly with ampicillin and tetracyclines 72.
a possible interaction has been suggested with hormonal contraceptives and the herbal supplement st. johns wort based on some reports of oral contraceptive users experiencing breakthrough bleeding shortly after starting st. johns wort.
albuterol, antihistamines, antidiabetic drugs, diuretics, digitalis.
there is no information regarding the effect on lamivudine pharmacokinetics of higher doses of tmp/smx such as those used to treat pneumocystis carinii pneumonia.
lamivudine and zalcitabine may inhibit the intracellular phosphorylation of one another.
therefore, use of lamivudine in combination with zalcitabine is not recommended
drugs that may increase dasatinib plasma concentrations cyp3a4 inhibitors: dasatinib is a cyp3a4 substrate.
concomitant use of sprycel and drugs that inhibit cyp3a4 (eg, ketoconazole, itraconazole, erythromycin, clarithromycin, ritonavir, atazanavir, indinavir, nefazodone, nelfinavir, saquinavir, telithromycin) may increase exposure to dasatinib and should be avoided.
in patients receiving treatment with sprycel, close monitoring for toxicity and a sprycel dose reduction should be considered if systemic administration of a potent cyp3a4 inhibitor cannot be avoided.
drugs that may decrease dasatinib plasma concentrations cyp3a4 inducers: drugs that induce cyp3a4 activity may decrease dasatinib plasma concentrations.
in patients in whom cyp3a4 inducers (eg, dexamethasone, phenytoin, carbamazepine, rifampicin, phenobarbital) are indicated, alternative agents with less enzyme induction potential should be used.
if sprycel must be administered with a cyp3a4 inducer, a dose increase in sprycel should be considered.
antacids: nonclinical data demonstrate that the solubility of dasatinib is ph dependent.
simultaneous administration of sprycel with antacids should be avoided.
if antacid therapy is needed, the antacid dose should be administered at least 2 hours prior to or 2 hours after the dose of sprycel.
h2 blockers/proton pump inhibitors: long-term suppression of gastric acid secretion by h2 blockers or proton pump inhibitors (eg, famotidine and omeprazole) is likely to reduce dasatinib exposure.
the concomitant use of h2 blockers or proton pump inhibitors with sprycel is not recommended.
the use of antacids should be considered in place of h2 blockers or proton pump inhibitors in patients receiving sprycel therapy.
drugs that may have their plasma concentration altered by dasatinib cyp3a4 substrates: dasatinib is a time-dependent inhibitor of cyp3a4.
therefore, cyp3a4 substrates known to have a narrow therapeutic index such as alfentanil, astemizole, terfenadine, cisapride, cyclosporine, fentanyl, pimozide, quinidine, sirolimus, tacrolimus, or ergot alkaloids (ergotamine, dihydroergotamine) should be administered with caution in patients receiving sprycel.
the use of fludara for injection in combination with pentostatin is not recommended due to the risk of severe pulmonary toxicity.
animal studies indicate that dobutamine may be ineffective if the patient has recently received a b-blocking drug.
preliminary studies indicate that the concomitant use of dobutamine and nitroprusside results in a higher cardiac output and, usually, a lower pulmonary wedge pressure than when either drug is used alone.
there was no evidence of drug interactions in clinical studies in which dobutamine was administered concurrently with other drugs, including digitalis preparations, furosemide, spironolactone, lidocaine, glyceryl trinitrate, isosorbide dinitrate, morphine, atropine, heparin, protamine, potassium chloride, folic acid, and acetaminophen.
increased nephrotoxicity has been reported following concomitant administration of cephalosporins and aminoglycoside antibiotics.
drug/laboratory test interactions cephalosporins, including cefotaxime sodium, are known to occasionally induce a positive direct coombs test.
immediate and extended release tablets the hypoglycemic action of sulfonylureas may be potentiated by certain drugs including nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents, some azoles and other drugs that are highly protein bound, salicylates, sulfonamides, chloramphenicol, probenecid, coumarins, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, and beta adrenergic blocking agents.
in vitro binding studies with human serum proteins indicate that glipizide binds differently than tolbutamide and does not interact with salicylate or dicumarol.
these drugs include the thiazides and other diuretics, corticosteroids, phenothiazines, thyroid products, estrogens, oral contraceptives, phenytoin, nicotinic acid, sympathomimetics, calcium channel blocking drugs, and isoniazid.
a potential interaction between oral miconazole and oral hypoglycemic agents leading to severe hypoglycemia has been reported.
the effect of concomitant administration of fluconazole and glipizide has been demonstrated in a placebo-controlled crossover study in normal volunteers.
all subjects received glipizide alone and following treatment with 100 mg of fluconazole as a single daily oral dose for seven days.
the mean percentage increase in the glipizide auc after fluconazole administration was 56.9% (range: 35 to 81).
patients receiving other narcotic analgesics, general anesthetics, phenothiazines, tranquilizers, sedative-hypnotics, tricyclic antidepressants or other cns depressants (including alcohol) concomitantly with dilaudid may exhibit an additive cns depression.
catecholamine-depleting drugs (eg, reserpine) may have an additive effect when given with beta-blocking agents.
calcium channel blockers may also have an additive effect when given with tenormin .
beta blockers may exacerbate the rebound hypertension which can follow the withdrawal of clonidine.
if the two drugs are coadministered, the beta blocker should be withdrawn several days before the gradual withdrawal of clonidine.
if replacing clonidine by beta-blocker therapy, the introduction of beta blockers should be delayed for several days after clonidine administration has stopped.
concomitant use of prostaglandin synthase inhibiting drugs, eg, indomethacin, may decrease the hypotensive effects of beta blockers.
information on concurrent usage of atenolol and aspirin is limited.
data from several studies, ie, timi-ii, isis-2, currently do not suggest any clinical interaction between aspirin and beta blockers in the acute myocardial infarction setting.
taking a rauwolfia alkaloid while you are taking or within 2 weeks of taking mao inhibitors may increase the risk of central nervous system depression or may cause a severe high blood pressure reaction.
studies have shown that lansoprazole does not have clinically significant interactions with other drugs metabolized by the cytochrome p450 system, such as warfarin, antipyrine, indomethacin, ibuprofen, phenytoin, propranolol, prednisone, diazepam, clarithromycin, or terfenadine in healthy subjects.
when lansoprazole was administered concomitantly with theophylline (cyp1a2, cyp3a), a minor increase (10%) in the clearance of theophylline was seen.
nonetheless, individual patients may require additional titration of their theophylline dosage when lansoprazole is started or stopped to ensure clinically effective blood levels.
lansoprazole has also been shown to have no clinically significant interaction with amoxicillin.
in a single-dose crossover study examining lansoprazole 30 mg and omeprazole 20 mg each administered alone and concomitantly with sucralfate 1 gram, absorption of the proton pump inhibitors was delayed and their bioavailability was reduced by 17% and 16%, respectively, when administered concomitantly with sucralfate.
therefore, proton pump inhibitors should be taken at least 30 minutes prior to sucralfate.
in clinical trials, antacids were administered concomitantly with lansoprazole delayed-release capsules;
therefore, it is theoretically possible that lansoprazole may interfere with the absorption of drugs where gastric ph is an important determinant of bioavailability (e.g. ketoconazole, ampicillin esters, iron salts, digoxin).
in clinical studies performed with fondaparinux, the concomitant use of oral anticoagulants (warfarin), platelet inhibitors (acetylsalicylic acid), nsaids (piroxicam), and digoxin did not significantly affect the pharmacokinetics/pharmacodynamics of fondaparinux sodium.
in addition, fondaparinux neither influenced the pharmacodynamics of warfarin, acetylsalicylic acid, piroxicam, and digoxin, nor the pharmacokinetics of digoxin at steady state.
in an in vitro study in human liver microsomes, inhibition of cyp2a6 hydroxylation of coumarin by fondaparinux (200 m m m i.e., 350 mg/l) was 17-28%.
since fondaparinux does not markedly inhibit cyp450s (cyp1a2, cyp2a6, cyp2c9, cyp2c19, cyp2d6, cyp2e1, or cyp3a4) in vitro, fondaparinux sodium is not expected to significantly interact with other drugs in vivo by inhibition of metabolism mediated by these isozymes.
bacteriostatic antibiotics: chloramphenicol, erythromycins, sulfonamides, or tetracyclines may interfere with the bactericidal effect of penicillins.
probenecid: may decrease renal tubular secretion of ampicillin resulting in increased blood levels and/or ampicillin toxicity.
drug/laboratory test interaction after treatment with ampicillin, a false-positive reaction for glucose in the urine may occur with copper sulfate tests (benedicts solution, fehlings solution, or clinitest tablets) but not with enzyme based tests such as clinistix and glucose enzymatic test strip usp.
itraconazole decreases busulfan clearance by up to 25%, and may produce aucs   1500  m min in some patients.
fluconazole, and the 5-ht3 antiemetics ondansetron (zofran) and granisetron (kytril) have all been used with busulfex.
phenytoin increases the clearance of busulfan by 15% or more, possibly due to the induction of glutathione-s-transferase.
since the pharmacokinetics of busulfex were studied in patients treated with phenytoin, the clearance of busulfex at the recommended dose may be lower and exposure (auc) higher in patients not treated with phenytoin.
because busulfan is eliminated from the body via conjugation with glutathione, use of acetaminophen prior to ( 72 hours) or concurrent with busulfex may result in reduced busulfan clearance based upon the known property of acetaminophen to decrease glutathione levels in the blood and tissues.
alcohol - although lexapro did not potentiate the cognitive and motor effects of alcohol in a clinical trial, as with other psychotropic medications, the use of alcohol by patients taking lexapro is not recommended.
monoamine oxidase inhibitors (maois)
drugs that interfere with hemostasis (nsaids, aspirin, warfarin, etc.)
epidemiological studies of the case-control and cohort design that have demonstrated an association between use of psychotropic drugs that interfere with serotonin reuptake and the occurrence of upper gastrointestinal bleeding have also shown that concurrent use of an nsaid or aspirin potentiated the risk of bleeding.
cimetidine - in subjects who had received 21 days of 40 mg/day racemic citalopram, combined administration of 400 mg/day cimetidine for 8 days resulted in an increase in citalopram auc and cmax of 43% and 39%, respectively.
digoxin - in subjects who had received 21 days of 40 mg/day racemic citalopram, combined administration of citalopram and digoxin (single dose of 1 mg) did not significantly affect the pharmacokinetics of either citalopram or digoxin.
lithium - coadministration of racemic citalopram (40 mg/day for 10 days) and lithium (30 mmol/day for 5 days) had no significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of citalopram or lithium.
nevertheless, plasma lithium levels should be monitored with appropriate adjustment to the lithium dose in accordance with standard clinical practice.
because lithium may enhance the serotonergic effects of escitalopram, caution should be exercised when lexapro and lithium are coadministered.
pimozide and celexa - in a controlled study, a single dose of pimozide 2 mg co-administered with racemic citalopram 40 mg given once daily for 11 days was associated with a mean increase in qtc values of approximately 10 msec compared to pimozide given alone.
racemic citalopram did not alter the mean auc or cmax of pimozide.
sumatriptan - there have been rare postmarketing reports describing patients with weakness, hyperreflexia, and incoordination following the use of a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (ssri) and sumatriptan.
if concomitant treatment with sumatriptan and an ssri (e.g., fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine, sertraline, citalopram, escitalopram) is clinically warranted, appropriate observation of the patient is advised.
theophylline - combined administration of racemic citalopram (40 mg/day for 21 days) and the cyp1a2 substrate theophylline (single dose of 300 mg) did not affect the pharmacokinetics of theophylline.
the effect of theophylline on the pharmacokinetics of citalopram was not evaluated.
warfarin - administration of 40 mg/day racemic citalopram for 21 days did not affect the pharmacokinetics of warfarin, a cyp3a4 substrate.
carbamazepine - combined administration of racemic citalopram (40 mg/day for 14 days) and carbamazepine (titrated to 400 mg/day for 35 days) did not significantly affect the pharmacokinetics of carbamazepine, a cyp3a4 substrate.
although trough citalopram plasma levels were unaffected, given the enzyme-inducing properties of carbamazepine, the possibility that carbamazepine might increase the clearance of escitalopram should be considered if the two drugs are coadministered.
triazolam - combined administration of racemic citalopram (titrated to 40 mg/day for 28 days) and the cyp3a4 substrate triazolam (single dose of 0.25 mg) did not significantly affect the pharmacokinetics of either citalopram or triazolam.
ketoconazole - combined administration of racemic citalopram (40 mg) and ketoconazole (200 mg) decreased the cmax and auc of ketoconazole by 21% and 10%, respectively, and did not significantly affect the pharmacokinetics of citalopram.
ritonavir - combined administration of a single dose of ritonavir (600 mg), both a cyp3a4 substrate and a potent inhibitor of cyp3a4, and escitalopram (20 mg) did not affect the pharmacokinetics of either ritonavir or escitalopram.
however, coadministration of escitalopram (20 mg) and ritonavir (600 mg), a potent inhibitor of cyp3a4, did not significantly affect the pharmacokinetics of escitalopram.
because escitalopram is metabolized by multiple enzyme systems, inhibition of a single enzyme may not appreciably decrease escitalopram clearance.
in addition, steady state levels of racemic citalopram were not significantly different in poor metabolizers and extensive cyp2d6 metabolizers after multiple-dose administration of citalopram, suggesting that coadministration, with escitalopram, of a drug that inhibits cyp2d6, is unlikely to have clinically significant effects on escitalopram metabolism.
however, there are limited in vivo data suggesting a modest cyp2d6 inhibitory effect for escitalopram, i.e., coadministration of escitalopram (20 mg/day for 21 days) with the tricyclic antidepressant desipramine (single dose of 50 mg), a substrate for cyp2d6, resulted in a 40% increase in cmax and a 100% increase in auc of desipramine.
metoprolol - administration of 20 mg/day lexapro for 21 days in healthy volunteers resulted in a 50% increase in cmax and 82% increase in auc of the beta-adrenergic blocker metoprolol (given in a single dose of 100 mg).
coadministration of lexapro and metoprolol had no clinically significant effects on blood pressure or heart rate.
concomitant administration with racemic citalopram citalopram - since escitalopram is the active isomer of racemic citalopram (celexa), the two agents should not be coadministered.
diphenhydramine hydrochloride has additive effects with alcohol and other cns depressants (hypnotics, sedatives, tranquilizers, etc).
mao inhibitors prolong and intensify the anticholinergic (drying) effects of antihistamines.
hiv protease inhibitors: the effect of amprenavir on total drug concentrations of other hiv protease inhibitors in subjects receiving both agents was evaluated using comparisons to historical data.
indinavir steady-state cmax, a.c. and cmin were decreased by 22%, 38%, and 27%, respectively, by concomitant amprenavir.
saquinavir steady-state cmax, a.c. and cmin were increased 21%, decreased 19%, and decreased 48%, respectively, by concomitant amprenavir.
nelfinavir steady-state cmax, a.c. and cmin were increased by 12%, 15%, and 14%, respectively, by concomitant amprenavir.
methadone: coadministration of amprenavir and methadone can decrease plasma levels of methadone.
coadministration of amprenavir and methadone as compared to a non-matched historicalcontrol group resulted in a 30%, 27%, and 25% decrease in serum amprenavir auc, cmax, andcmin, respectively.
laboratory tests: the combination of amprenavir and low-dose ritonavir has been associated with elevations of cholesterol and triglycerides, sgot (ast), and sgpt (alt) in some patients.
appropriate laboratory testing should be considered prior to initiating combination therapy with amprenavir and ritonavir and at periodic intervals or if any clinical signs or symptoms of hyperlipidemia or elevated liver function tests occur during therapy.
for comprehensive information concerning laboratory test alterations associated with ritonavir, physicians should refer to the complete prescribing information for norvir (ritonavir).
co-administration with antifungal agents such as ketoconazole or itraconazole is not recommended.
nafazodone, fluvoxamine, cimetidine (consider xanax dose reduction).
fluoxetine, ocs, sertraline, diltiazem, macrolide antibiotics (exercise caution).
it is recommended that buspirone hydrochloride not be used concomitantly with mao inhibitors because the effects of concomitant administration of buspirone hcl with most other psychotropic drugs have not been studied, the concomitant use of buspirone hcl with other cns-active drugs should be approached with caution.
there is one report suggesting that the concomitant use of trazodone hydrochloride (desyrel) and buspirone hcl may have caused 3- to 6-fold elevations on sgpt (alt) in a few patients.
in a study in normal volunteers, concomitant administration of buspirone hcl and haloperidol resulted in increased serum haloperidol concentrations.
in vitro, buspirone does not displace tightly bound drugs like phenytoin, propranolol, and warfarin from serum proteins.
however, there has been one report of prolonged prothrombin time when buspirone was added to the regimen of a patient treated with warfarin.
the patient was also chronically receiving phenytoin, phenobarbital, digoxin, and levothyroxine sodium.
in vitro, buspirone may displace less firmly bound drugs like digoxin.
the concomitant use of alcohol or other central nervous system depressants may have an additive effect.
results from existing clinical trials suggest no significant interactions between copaxone  and other therapies commonly used in ms patients, including the concurrent use of corticosteroids for up to 28 days.
copaxone  has not been formally evaluated in combination with interferon beta.
however, 10 patients who switched from therapy with interferon beta to copaxone  did not report any serious and unexpected adverse reactions thought to be related to treatment.
when you are using idoxuridine, it is especially important that your health care professional know if you are using the following: eye product containing boric acid.
boric acid may interact with the idoxuridine preparation causing a gritty substance to form or may interact with the preservative in the idoxuridine preparation causing a toxic effect in the eye.
pharmacokinetic interaction studies with cetirizine in adults were conducted with pseudoephedrine, antipyrine, ketoconazole, erythromycin and azithromycin.
in a multiple dose study of theophylline (400 mg once daily for 3 days) and cetirizine (20 mg once daily for 3 days), a 16% decrease in the clearance of cetirizine was observed.
the disposition of theophylline was not altered by concomitant cetirizine administration.
drug-drug interactions: no clinically significant drug interactions have been found with theophylline at a low dose, azithromycin, pseudoephedrine, ketoconazole, or erythromycin.
there was a small decrease in the clearance of cetirizine caused by a 400-mg dose of theophylline;
dexbrompheniramine can interact with alcohol or other cns depressants (may potentiate the cns depressant effects of either these medications or antihistamines), anticholinergics or other medications with anticholinergic activity (anticholinergic effects may be potentiated when these medications are used concurrently with antihistamines), and monoamine oxidase (mao) inhibitors (concurrent use with antihistamines may prolong and intensify the anticholinergic and cns depressant effects of antihistamines).
the results of a study of coadministration of ethambutol (50 mg/kg) with an aluminum hydroxide containing antacid to 13 patients with tuberculosis showed a reduction of mean serum concentrations and urinary excretion of ethambutol of approximately 20% and 13%, respectively, suggesting that the oral absorption of ethambutol may be reduced by these antacid products.
it is recommended to avoid concurrent administration of ethambutol with aluminum hydroxide containing antacids for at least 4 hours following ethambutol administration.
concomitant use of ellence with other cardioactive compounds that could cause heart failure (e.g., calcium channel blockers), requires close monitoring of cardiac function throughout treatment.
cimetidine increased the auc of epirubicin by 50%.
cimetidine treatment should be stopped during treatment with ellence.
in patients using cardiac glycosides (digoxin and others), plasma levels of calcium, potassium and magnesium must be carefully monitored.
insulin: a clinical study in 6 insulin-dependent diabetic patients demonstrated no effect of extraneal on insulin absorption from the peritoneal cavity or on insulins ability to control blood glucose when insulin was administered intraperitoneally with extraneal.
however, appropriate monitoring of blood glucose should be performed when initiating extraneal in diabetic patients and insulin dosage should be adjusted if needed.
heparin: no human drug interaction studies with heparin were conducted.
in vitro studies demonstrated no evidence of incompatibility of heparin with extraneal.
antibiotics: no human drug interaction studies with antibiotics were conducted.
in vitro studies evaluating the minimum inhibitory concentration (mic) of vancomycin, cefazolin, ampicillin, ampicillin/flucoxacillin, ceftazidime, gentamicin, and amphotericin demonstrated no evidence of incompatibility of these antibiotics with extraneal.
aspirin, warfarin, heparin, nsaids
however, since there is an increased risk of bleeding with xigris, caution should be employed when xigris is used with other drugs that affect hemostasis.
approximately 2/3 of the patients in the phase 3 study received either prophylactic low dose heparin (unfractionated heparin up to 15,000 units/day) or prophylactic doses of low molecular weight heparins as indicated in the prescribing information for the specific products.
concomitant use of prophylactic low dose heparin did not appear to affect safety, however, its effects on the efficacy of xigris have not been evaluated in an adequate and well-controlled clinical trial.
drug/laboratory test interaction because xigris may affect the aptt assay, xigris present in plasma samples may interfere with one-stage coagulation assays based on the aptt (such as factor viii, ix, and xi assays).
phenothiazines - taking piperazine and a phenothiazine together may increase the risk of convulsions (seizures).
pyrantel (e.g., antiminth) - taking piperazine and pyrantel together may decrease the effects of piperazine.
tambocor has been administered to patients receiving digitalis preparations or beta-adrenergic blocking agents without adverse effects.
during administration of multiple oral doses of tambocor to healthy subjects stabilized on a maintenance dose of digoxin, a 13%-19% increase in plasma digoxin levels occurred at six hours postdose.
in a study involving healthy subjects receiving tambocor and propranolol concurrently, plasma flecainide levels were increased about 20% and propranolol levels were increased about 30% compared to control values.
in this formal interaction study, tambocor and propranolol were each found to have negative inotropic effects;
the effects of concomitant administration of tambocor and propranolol on the pr interval were less than additive.
in tambocor clinical trials, patients who were receiving beta blockers concurrently did not experience an increased incidence of side effects.
nevertheless, the possibility of additive negative inotropic effects of beta blockers and flecainide should be recognized.
tambocor has been used in a large number of patients receiving diuretics without apparent interaction.
limited data in patients receiving known enzyme inducers ( phenytoin, phenobarbital, carbamazepine ) indicate only a 30% increase in the rate of flecainide elimination.
in healthy subjects receiving cimetidine (1 gm daily) for one week, plasma flecainide levels increased by about 30% and half-life increased by about 10%.
when amiodarone is added to flecainide therapy, plasma flecainide levels may increase two-fold or more in some patients, if flecainide dosage is not reduced.
drugs that inhibit cytochrome p450iid6, such as quinidine , might increase the plasma concentrations of flecainide in patients that are on chronic flecainide therapy;
there has been little experience with the coadministration of tambocor and either disopyramide or verapamil.
because both of these drugs have negative inotropic properties and the effects of coadministration with tambocor are unknown, neither disopyramide nor verapamil should be administered concurrently with tambocor unless, in the judgment of the physician, the benefits of this combination outweigh the risks.
there has been too little experience with the coadministration of tambocor with nifedipine or diltiazem to recommend concomitant use.
the action of the benzodiazepines may be potentiated by anticonvulsants, antihistamines, alcohol, barbiturates, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, narcotics, phenothiazines, psychotropic medications, or other drugs that produce cns depression.
while no in vivo drug-drug interaction studies were conducted between estazolam and inducers of cyp3a, compounds that are potent cyp3a inducers (such as carbamazepine, phenytoin, rifampin, and barbiturates) would be expected to decrease estazolam concentrations.
estazolam: interaction with drugs that inhibit metabolism via cytochrome p450 3a (cyp3a): the metabolism of estazolam to the major circulating metabolite 4-hydroxy-estazolam and the metabolism of other triazolobenzodiazepines is catalyzed by cyp3a.
consequently, estazolam should be avoided in patients receiving ketoconazole and itraconazole, which are very potent inhibitors of cyp3a.
the following are examples of drugs known to inhibit the metabolism of other related benzodiazepines, presumably through inhibition of cyp3a: nefazodone, fluvoxamine, cimetidine, diltiazem, isoniazide, and some macrolide antibiotics.
drug interaction with fluoxetine: a multiple-dose study was conducted to assess the effect of fluoxetine 20 mg bid on the pharmacokinetics of estazolam 2 mg qhs after seven days.
the pharmacokinetics of estazolam (cmax and auc) were not affected during multiple-dose fluoxetine, suggesting no clinically significant pharmacokinetic interaction.
estazolam: interaction with other drugs that are metabolized by cytochrome p450 (cyp): at clinically relevant concentrations, in vitro studies indicate that estazolam (0.6 m) was not inhibitory towards the major cytochrome p450 isoforms cyp1a2, cyp2a6, cyp2c9, cyp2c19, cyp2d6, cyp2e1, and cyp3a.
caution should be exercised when administering etopophos with drugs that are known to inhibit phosphatase activities (e.g., levamisole hydrochloride).
high-dose cyclosporin a resulting in concentrations above 2000 ng/ml administered with oral etoposide has led to an 80% increase in etoposide exposure with a 38% decrease in total body clearance of etoposide compared to etoposide alone.
cevimeline should be administered with caution to patients taking beta adrenergic antagonists, because of the possibility of conduction disturbances.
exemestane is extensively metabolized by cyp 3a4, but coadministration of ketoconazole, a potent inhibitor of cyp 3a4, has no significant effect on exemestane pharmacokinetics.
co-medications that induce cyp 3a4 (e.g., rifampicin, phenytoin, carbamazepine, phenobarbital, or st. john s wort) may significantly decrease exposure to exemestane.
amiodarone is metabolized to desethylamiodarone by the cytochrome p450 (cyp450) enzyme group, specifically cytochromes p450 3a4 (cyp3a4) and cyp2c8.
in view of the long and variable half-life of amiodarone, potential for drug interactions exists not only with concomitant medication but also with drugs administered after discontinuation of amiodarone.
since amiodarone is a substrate for cyp3a4 and cyp2c8, drugs/substances that inhibit these isoenzymes may decrease the metabolism and increase serum concentration of amiodarone.
reported examples include the following: protease inhibitors: protease inhibitors are known to inhibit cyp3a4 to varying degrees.
a case report of one patient taking amiodarone 200 mg and indinavir 800 mg three times a day resulted in increases in amiodarone concentrations from 0.9 mg/l to 1.3 mg/l.
monitoring for amiodarone toxicity and serial measurement of amiodarone serum concentration during concomitant protease inhibitor therapy should be considered.
histamine h2 antagonists: cimetidine inhibits cyp3a4 and can increase serum amiodarone levels.
other substances: grapefruit juice given to healthy volunteers increased amiodarone auc by 50% and cmax by 84%, resulting in increased plasma levels of amiodarone.
this information should be considered when changing from intravenous amiodarone to oral amiodarone .
amiodarone may suppress certain cyp450 enzymes, including cyp1a2, cyp2c9, cyp2d6, and cyp3a4.
reported examples of this interaction include the following: immunosuppressives: cyclosporine (cyp3a4 substrate) administered in combination with oral amiodarone has been reported to produce persistently elevated plasma concentrations of cyclosporine resulting in elevated creatinine, despite reduction in dose of cyclosporine.
hmg-coa reductase inhibitors: simvastatin (cyp3a4 substrate) in combination with amiodarone has been associated with reports of myopathy/rhabdomyolysis.
cardiovasculars: cardiac glycosides: in patients receiving digoxin therapy, administration of oral amiodarone regularly results in an increase in serum digoxin concentration that may reach toxic levels with resultant clinical toxicity.
amiodarone taken concomitantly with digoxin increases the serum digoxin concentration by 70% after one day.
on administration of oral amiodarone, the need for digitalis therapy should be reviewed and the dose reduced by approximately 50% or discontinued.
antiarrhythmics: other antiarrhythmic drugs, such as quinidine, procainamide, disopyramide, and phenytoin, have been used concurrently with amiodarone.
there have been case reports of increased steady-state levels of quinidine, procainamide, and phenytoin during concomitant therapy with amiodarone.
amiodarone taken concomitantly with quinidine increases quinidine serum concentration by 33% after two days.
amiodarone taken concomitantly with procainamide for less than seven days increases plasma concentrations of procainamide and n-acetyl procainamide by 55% and 33%, respectively.
quinidine and procainamide doses should be reduced by one-third when either is administered with amiodarone.
plasma levels of flecainide have been reported to increase in the presence of oral amiodarone;
because of this, the dosage of flecainide should be adjusted when these drugs are administered concomitantly.
combination of amiodarone with other antiarrhythmic therapy should be reserved for patients with life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias who are incompletely responsive to a single agent or incompletely responsive to amiodarone.
during transfer to oral amiodarone, the dose levels of previously administered agents should be reduced by 30 to 50% several days after the addition of oral amiodarone.
the continued need for the other antiarrhythmic agent should be reviewed after the effects of amiodarone have been established, and discontinuation ordinarily should be attempted.
in amiodarone-treated patients who require additional antiarrhythmic therapy, the initial dose of such agents should be approximately half of the usual recommended dose.
antihypertensives: amiodarone should be used with caution in patients receiving  -receptor blocking agents (e.g., propranolol, a cyp3a4 inhibitor) or calcium channel antagonists (e.g., verapamil, a cyp3a4 substrate, and diltiazem, a cyp3a4 inhibitor) because of the possible potentiation of bradycardia, sinus arrest, and av block;
anticoagulants: potentiation of warfarin-type (cyp2c9 and cyp3a4 substrate) anticoagulant response is almost always seen in patients receiving amiodarone and can result in serious or fatal bleeding.
since the concomitant administration of warfarin with amiodarone increases the prothrombin time by 100% after 3 to 4 days, the dose of the anticoagulant should be reduced by one-third to one-half, and prothrombin times should be monitored closely.
some drugs/substances are known to accelerate the metabolism of amiodarone by stimulating the synthesis of cyp3a4 (enzyme induction).
reported examples of this interaction include the following: antibiotics: rifampin is a potent inducer of cyp3a4.
administration of rifampin concomitantly with oral amiodarone has been shown to result in decreases in serum concentrations of amiodarone and desethylamiodarone.
since amiodarone is a substrate for cyp3a4, there is the potential that the use of st. john s wort in patients receiving amiodarone could result in reduced amiodarone levels.
other reported interactions with amiodarone: fentanyl (cyp3a4 substrate) in combination with amiodarone may cause hypotension, bradycardia, and decreased cardiac output.
sinus bradycardia has been reported with oral amiodarone in combination with lidocaine (cyp3a4 substrate) given for local anesthesia.
seizure, associated with increased lidocaine concentrations, has been reported with concomitant administration of intravenous amiodarone.
dextromethorphan is a substrate for both cyp2d6 and cyp3a4.
amiodarone inhibits cyp2d6.
cholestyramine increases enterohepatic elimination of amiodarone and may reduce its serum levels and t1/2.
fluoroquinolones, macrolide antibiotics, and azoles are known to cause qtc prolongation.
there have been reports of qtc prolongation, with or without tdp, in patients taking amiodarone when fluoroquinolones, macrolide antibiotics, or azoles were administered concomitantly.
hemodynamic and electrophysiologic interactions have also been observed after concomitant administration with propranolol, diltiazem, and verapamil.
in addition to the interactions noted above, chronic (  2 weeks) oral cordarone administration impairs metabolism of phenytoin, dextromethorphan, and methotrexate.
oral contraceptives multiple doses of cefditoren pivoxil had no effect on the pharmacokinetics of ethinyl estradiol, the estrogenic component in most oral contraceptives.
although the clinical significance is not known, it is not recommended that cefditoren pivoxil be taken concomitantly with antacids.
h2-receptor antagonists: co-administration of a single dose of intravenously administered famotidine (20 mg) reduced the oral absorption of a single 400 mg dose of cefditoren pivoxil administered following a meal, as evidenced by a 27% decrease in mean cmax and a 22% decrease in mean auc.
although the clinical significance is not known, it is not recommended that cefditoren pivoxil be taken concomitantly with h2 receptor antagonists.
probenecid: as with other b-lactam antibiotics, co-administration of probenecid with cefditoren pivoxil resulted in an increase in the plasma exposure of cefditoren, with a 49% increase in mean cmax, a 122% increase in mean auc, and a 53% increase in half-life.
the potentiating action of hydroxyzine must be considered when the drug is used in conjunction with central nervous system depressants such as narcotics, non-narcotic analgesics and barbiturates.
therefore when central nervous system depressants are administered concomitantly with hydroxyzine their dosage should be reduced.
patients should be advised against the simultaneous use of other cns depressant drugs, and cautioned that the effect of alcohol may be increased.
diuretics: patients on diuretics, especially those with intravascular volume depletion, may occasionally experience an excessive reduction of blood pressure after initiation of therapy with fosinopril sodium.
the possibility of hypotensive effects can be minimized by either discontinuing the diuretic or increasing salt intake prior to initiation of treatment with fosinopril sodium.
potassium supplements and potassium-sparing diuretics: fosinopril sodium can attenuate potassium loss caused by thiazide diuretics.
potassium-sparing diuretics (spironolactone, amiloride,triamterene, and others) or potassium supplements can increase the risk of hyperkalemia.
lithium: increased serum lithium levels and symptoms of lithium toxicity have been reported in patients receiving ace inhibitors during therapy with lithium.
antacids: in a clinical pharmacology study, coadministration of an antacid (aluminum hydroxide, magnesium hydroxide, and simethicone) with fosinopril reduced serum levels and urinary excretion of fosinoprilat as compared with fosinopril administered alone, suggesting that antacids may impair absorption of fosinopril.
in separate single or multiple dose pharmacokinetic interaction studies with chlorthalidone, nifedipine, propanolol, hydrochlorothiazide, cimetidine, metoclopramide, propantheline, digoxin, and warfarin, the bioavailability of fosinoprilat was not altered by coadministration of fosinopril with any one of these drugs.
in a study with concomitant administration of aspirin and fosinopril sodium, the bioavailability of unbound fosinoprilat was not altered.
in a pharmacokinetic interaction study with warfarin, bioavailability parameters, the degree of protein binding, and the anticoagulant effect (measured by prothrombin time) of warfarin were not significantly changed.
drug/laboratory test interaction fosinopril may cause a false low measurement of serum digoxin levels with the digi- tab  ria kit for digoxin.
possible drug interactions of humorsol with succinylcholine or with other anticholinesterase agents.
drug interactions: the central anticholinergic syndrome can occur when anticholinergic agents such as akineton are administered concomitantly with drugs that have secondary anticholinergic actions, e.g., certain narcotic analgesics such as meperidine, the phenothiazines and other antipsychotics, tricyclic antidepressants, certain antiarrhythmics such as the quinidine salts, and antihistamines.
therefore, interactions could occur following concomitant administration of psychotropic drugs (e.g., narcotics, analgesics, antiemetics, sedatives, tranquilizers).
concurrent administration of drugs possessing nephrotoxic (e.g., aminoglycosides, indomethacin), myelotoxic (e.g., cytotoxic chemotherapy), cardiotoxic (e.g., doxorubicin) or hepatotoxic (e.g., methotrexate, asparaginase) effects with proleukin may increase toxicity in these organ systems.
the safety and efficacy of proleukin in combination with any antineoplastic agents have not been established.
hypersensitivity reactions have been reported in patients receiving combination regimens containing sequential high dose proleukin and antineoplastic agents, specifically, dacarbazine, cis-platinum, tamoxifen and interferon-alfa.
myocardial injury, including myocardial infarction, myocarditis, ventricular hypokinesia, and severe rhabdomyolysis appear to be increased in patients receiving proleukin and interferon-alfa concurrently.
exacerbation or the initial presentation of a number of autoimmune and inflammatory disorders has been observed following concurrent use of interferon-alfa and proleukin, including crescentic iga glomerulonephritis, oculo-bulbar myasthenia gravis, inflammatory arthritis, thyroiditis, bullous pemphigoid, and stevens-johnson syndrome.
although glucocorticoids have been shown to reduce proleukin-induced side effects including fever, renal insufficiency, hyperbilirubinemia, confusion, and dyspnea, concomitant administration of these agents with proleukin may reduce the antitumor effectiveness of proleukin and thus should be avoided. 12 beta-blockers and other antihypertensives may potentiate the hypotension seen with proleukin.
delayed adverse reactions to iodinated contrast media: a review of the literature revealed that 12.6% (range 11-28%) of 501 patients treated with various interleukin-2 containing regimens who were subsequently administered radiographic iodinated contrast media experienced acute, atypical adverse reactions.
in study 1, patients with colorectal cancer were given irinotecan/5-fu/leucovorin (bolus-ifl) with or without avastin.
irinotecan concentrations were similar in patients receiving bolus-ifl alone and in combination with avastin.
the concentrations of sn38, the active metabolite of irinotecan, were on average 33% higher in patients receiving bolus-ifl in combination with avastin when compared with bolus-ifl alone.
due to high inter-patient variability and limited sampling, the extent of the increase in sn38 levels in patients receiving concurrent irinotecan and avastin is uncertain.
effects of lapatinib on drug metabolizing enzymes and drug transport systems lapatinib inhibits cyp3a4 and cyp2c8 in vitro at clinically relevant concentrations.
drugs that inhibit or induce cytochrome p450 3a4 enzymes lapatinib undergoes extensive metabolism by cyp3a4, and concomitant administration of strong inhibitors or inducers of cyp3a4 alter lapatinib concentrations significantly.
ketoconazole: in healthy subjects receiving ketoconazole, a cyp3a4 inhibitor, at 200 mg twice daily for 7 days, systemic exposure (auc) to lapatinib was increased to approximately 3.6-fold of control and half-life increased to 1.7-fold of control.
carbamazepine: in healthy subjects receiving the cyp3a4 inducer, carbamazepine, at 100 mg twice daily for 3 days and 200 mg twice daily for 17 days, systemic exposure (auc) to lapatinib was decreased approximately 72%.
if tykerb is administered with drugs that inhibit pgp, increased concentrations of lapatinib are likely, and caution should be exercised.
other chemotherapy agents in a separate study, concomitant administration of lapatinib with capecitabine did not meaningfully alter the pharmacokinetics of either agent (or the metabolites of capecitabine).
interactions with other cns agents: concurrent use of levo-dromoran with all central nervous system depressants (eg, alcohol, sedatives, hypnotics, other opioids, general anesthetics, barbiturates, tricyclic antidepressants, phenothiazines, tranquilizers, skeletal muscle relaxants and antihistamines) may result in additive central nervous system depressant effects.
although no interaction between mao inhibitors and levo-dromoran has been observed, it is not recommended for use with mao inhibitors.
most cases of serious or fatal adverse events involving levo-dromoran reported to the manufacturer or the fda have involved either the administration of large initial doses or too frequent doses of the drug to nonopioid tolerant patients, or the simultaneous administration of levorphanol with other drugs affecting respiration.
interactions with mixed agonist/antagonist opioid analgesics: agonist/antagonist analgesics (eg, pentazocine, nalbuphine, butorphanol, dezocine and buprenorphine) should not be administered to a patient who has received or is receiving a course of therapy with a pure agonist opioid analgesic such as levo-dromoran.
in opioid-dependent patients, mixed agonist/antagonist analgesics may precipitate withdrawal symptoms.
ethanol:clinical evidence has shown that etretinate can be formed with concurrent ingestion of acitretin and ethanol.
glibenclamide: in a study of 7 healthy male volunteers, acitretin treatment potentiated the blood glucose lowering effect of glibenclamide (a sulfonylurea similar to chlorpropamide) in 3 of the 7 subjects.
repeating the study with 6 healthy male volunteers in the absence of glibenclamide did not detect an effect of acitretin on glucose tolerance.
hormonal contraceptives: it has not been established if there is a pharmacokinetic interaction between acitretin and combined oral contraceptives.
however, it has been established that acitretin interferes with the contraceptive effect of microdosed progestin minipill preparations.
microdosed minipill progestin preparations are not recommended for use with soriatane.
it is not known whether other progestational contraceptives, such as implants and injectables, are adequate methods of contraception during acitretin therapy.
methotrexate: an increased risk of hepatitis has been reported to result from combined use of methotrexate and etretinate.
consequently, the combination of methotrexate with acitretin is also contraindicated.
phenytoin: if acitretin is given concurrently with phenytoin, the protein binding of phenytoin may be reduced.
tetracyclines: since both acitretin and tetracyclines can cause increased intracranial pressure, their combined use is contraindicated.
vitamin a and oral retinoids: concomitant administration of vitamin a and/or other oral retinoids with acitretin must be avoided because of the risk of hypervitaminosis a.
other: there appears to be no pharmacokinetic interaction between acitretin and cimetidine, digoxin, or glyburide.
investigations into the effect of acitretin on the protein binding of anticoagulants of the coumarin type (warfarin) revealed no interaction.
some quinolones, including ciprofloxacin, have also been shown to interfere with the metabolism of caffeine.
some quinolones, including ciprofloxacin, have been associated with transient elevations in serum creatinine in patients receiving cyclosporine concomitantly.
glyburide: the concomitant administration of ciprofloxacin with the sulfonylurea glyburide has, on rare occasions, resulted in severe hypoglycemia.
histamine h2-receptor antagonists: histamine h2-receptor antagonists appear to have no significant effect on the bioavailability of ciprofloxacin.
methotrexate renal tubular transport of methotrexate may be inhibited by concomitant administration of ciprofloxacin, potentially leading to increased plasma levels of methotrexate.
therefore, patients under methotrexate therapy should be carefully monitored when concomitant ciprofloxacin therapy is indicated.
multivalent cation-containing products: concurrent administration of a quinolone, including ciprofloxacin, with multivalent cation-containing products such as magnesium or aluminum antacids, sucralfate, videx chewable/buffered tablets or pediatric powder, or products containing calcium, iron, or zinc may substantially decrease the absorption of ciprofloxacin, resulting in serum and urine levels considerably lower than desired.
this time window is different than for other oral formulations of ciprofloxacin, which are usually administered 2 hours before or 6 hours after antacids.
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (but not aspirin): these drugs in combination with very high doses of quinolones have been shown to provoke convulsions in pre-clinical studies.
omeprazole: the rate and extent of absorption of ciprofloxacin was bioequivalent when proquin xr was given alone or when proquin xr was given 2 hours after omeprazole at the dose that maximally suppresses gastric acid secretion.
omeprazole should be taken as directed and proquin xr should be taken with a main meal of the day, preferably the evening meal..
phenytoin: altered serum levels of phenytoin (increased and decreased) have been reported in patients receiving concomitant ciprofloxacin.
probenecid: probenecid interferes with renal tubular secretion of ciprofloxacin and produces an increase in the level of ciprofloxacin in serum.
theophylline: as with some other quinolones, concurrent administration of ciprofloxacin with theophylline may lead to elevated serum concentrations of theophylline and prolongation of its elimination half-life.
warfarin: quinolones have been reported to enhance the effects of the oral anticoagulant warfarin or its derivatives.
aminosalicylic acid may decrease the amount of digoxin (lanoxin, lanoxicaps) that gets absorbed into your body.
in the case that you are taking digoxin while taking aminosalicylic acid, higher doses of digoxin may be needed.
aminosalicylic acid may also decrease the absorption of vitamin b12, which can lead to a deficiency.
therefore you may need to take a vitamin b12 supplement while taking aminosalicylic acid.
warfarin, digoxin, salicylate, and heparin the in vitro binding of warfarin to plasma proteins is only slightly reduced by ketorolac tromethamine (99.5% control vs 99.3%) when ketorolac plasma concentrations reach 5 to10 m g/ml.
ketorolac does not alter digoxin protein binding.
in vitro studies indicate that, at therapeutic concentrations of salicylate (300 m g/ml), the binding of ketorolac was reduced from approximately 99.2% to 97.5%, representing a potential twofold increase in unbound ketorolac plasma levels.
therapeutic concentrations of digoxin, warfarin, ibuprofen, naproxen, piroxicam, acetaminophen, phenytoin andtolbutamide did not alter ketorolac tromethamine protein binding.
in a study involving 12 adult volunteers, toradoloral was coadministered with a single dose of 25 mg warfarin, causing no significant changes in pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics of warfarin.
in another study, toradoliv/im was given with two doses of 5000 u of heparin to 11 healthy volunteers, resulting in a mean template bleeding time of 6.4 minutes (3.2 to 11.4 min) compared to a mean of 6.0 minutes (3.4 to 7.5 min) for heparin alone and 5.1 minutes (3.5 to 8.5 min) for placebo.
although these results do not indicate a significant interaction between toradol and warfarin or heparin, the administration of toradol to patients taking anticoagulants should be done extremely cautiously, and patients should be closely monitored.
furosemide: toradol iv/im reduced the diuretic response to furosemide in normovolemic healthy subjects by approximately 20% (mean sodium and urinary output decreased 17%).
probenecid: concomitant administration of toradol oral and probenecid resulted in decreased clearance of ketorolac and significant increases in ketorolac plasma levels (total auc increased approximately threefold from 5.4 to 17.8 m g/h/ml) and terminal half-life increased approximately twofold from 6.6 to 15.1 hours.
therefore, concomitant use of toradol and probenecid is contraindicated.
lithium: inhibition of renal lithium clearance, leading to an increase in plasma lithium concentration, has been reported with some prostaglandin synthesis-inhibiting drugs.
the effect of toradol on plasma lithium has not been studied, but cases of increased lithium plasma levels during toradol therapy have been reported.
methotrexate: concomitant administration of methotrexate and some nsaids has been reported to reduce the clearance of methotrexate, enhancing the toxicity of methotrexate.
the effect of toradol on methotrexate clearance has not been studied.
nondepolarizing muscle relaxants: in postmarketing experience there have been reports of a possible interaction between toradoliv/im and nondepolarizing muscle relaxants that resulted in apnea.
the concurrent use of toradol with muscle relaxants has not been formally studied.
ace inhibitors: concomitant use of ace inhibitors may increase the risk of renal impairment, particularly in volume-depleted patients.
antiepileptic drugs: sporadic cases of seizures have been reported during concomitant use of toradol and antiepileptic drugs (phenytoin, carbamazepine).
psychoactive drugs: hallucinations have been reported when toradol was used in patients taking psychoactive drugs (fluoxetine, thiothixene, alprazolam).
morphine: toradoliv/im has been administered concurrently with morphine in several clinical trials of postoperative pain without evidence of adverse interactions.
do not mix toradol and morphine in the same syringe.
renal clearance measurements of pah cannot be made with any significant accuracy in patients receiving sulfonamides, procaine, or thiazolesulfone.
probenecid depresses tubular secretion of certain weak acids such as pah.
therefore, patients receiving probenecid will have erroneously low erpf and tm pah values.
use in conjunction with other antiepileptic drugs: the addition of felbatol  to antiepileptic drugs (aeds) affects the steady-state plasma concentrations of aeds.
the net effect of these interactions is summarized in the following table: aed aed felbatol
carbamazepine (cbz)
specific effects of felbatol  on other antiepileptic drugs phenytoin: felbatol  causes an increase in steady-state phenytoin plasma concentrations.
in 10 otherwise healthy subjects with epilepsy ingesting phenytoin, the steadystate trough (cmin) phenytoin plasma concentration was 17 5 micrograms/ml.
increasing the felbamate dose to 1800 mg/day in six of these subjects increased the steady-state phenytoin cmin to 25 7 micrograms/ml.
in order to maintain phenytoin levels, limit adverse experiences, and achieve the felbamate dose of 3600 mg/day, a phenytoin dose reduction of approximately 40% was necessary for eight of these 10 subjects.
in a controlled clinical trial, a 20% reduction of the phenytoin dose at the initiation of felbatol  therapy resulted in phenytoin levels comparable to those prior to felbatol  administration.
carbamazepine: felbatol  causes a decrease in the steady-state carbamazepine plasma concentrations and an increase in the steady-state carbamazepine epoxide plasma concentration.
in nine otherwise healthy subjects with epilepsy ingesting carbamazepine, the steady-state trough (cmin) carbamazepine concentration was 8 2 micrograms/ml.
the carbamazepine steady-state cmin decreased 31% to 5 1 micrograms/ml when felbamate (3000 mg/day, divided into three doses) was coadministered.
carbamazepine epoxide steady-state cmin concentrations increased 57% from 1.0 0.3 to 1.6 0.4 micrograms/ml with the addition of felbamate.
in clinical trials, similar changes in carbamazepine and carbamazepine epoxide were seen.
valproate: felbatol  causes an increase in steady-state valproate concentrations.
in four subjects with epilepsy ingesting valproate, the steady-state trough (cmin) valproate plasma concentration was 63 16 micrograms/ml.
increasing the felbamate dose to 2400 mg/day increased the steadystate valproate cmin to 96 25 micrograms/ml.
corresponding values for free valproate cmin concentrations were 7 3, 9 4, and 11 6 micrograms/ml for 0, 1200, and 2400 mg/day felbatol , respectively.
the ratios of the aucs of unbound valproate to the aucs of the total valproate were 11.1 %, 13.0%, and 11.5%, with coadministration of 0, 1200, and 2400 mg/day of felbatol , respectively.
phenobarbital: coadministration of felbamate with phenobarbital causes an increase in phenobarbital plasma concentrations, in 12 otherwise healthy male volunteers ingesting phenobarbital, the steady-state trough (cmin) phenobarbital concentration was 14.2 micrograms/ml.
effects of other antiepileptic drugs on felbatol  phenytoin: phenytoin causes an approximate doubling of the clearance of felbatol  (felbamate) at steady state and, therefore, the addition of phenytoin causes an approximate 45% decrease in the steady-state trough concentrations of felbatol  as compared to the same dose of felbatol  given as monotherapy.
carbamazepine: carbamazepine causes an approximate 50% increase in the clearance of felbatol  at steady state and, therefore, the addition of carbamazepine results in an approximate 40% decrease in the steady-state trough concentrations of felbatol  as compared to the same dose of felbatol  given as monotherapy.
valproate: available data suggest that there is no significant effect of valproate on the clearance of felbatol  at steady state, therefore, the addition of valproate is not expected to cause a clinically important effect on felbatol  (felbamate) plasma concentrations.
phenobarbital: it appears that phenobarbital may reduce plasma felbamate concentrations.
steady-state plasma felbamate concentrations were found to be 29% lower than the mean concentrations of a group of newly diagnosed subjects with epilepsy also receiving 2400 mg of felbamate a day.
effects of antacids on felbatol  the rate and extent of absorption of a 2400 mg dose of felbatol  as monotherapy given as tablets was not affected when coadministered with antacids.
effects of erythromycin on felbatol  the coadministration of erythromycin (1000 mg/day) for 10 days did not alter the pharmacokinetic parameters of cmax, cmin, auc, ci/kg or tmax at felbamate daily doses of 3000 or 3600 mg/day in 10 otherwise healthy subjects with epilepsy.
effects of felbatol  on low-dose combination oral contraceptives a group of 24 nonsmoking, healthy white female volunteers established on an oral contraceptive regimen containing 30 mg ethinyl estradiol and 75 mg gestodene for at least 3 months received 2400 mg/day of felbamate from midcycle (day 15) to midcycle (day 14) of two consecutive oral contraceptive cycles.
felbamate treatment resulted in a 42% decrease in the gestodene auc 0-24, but no clinically relevant effect was observed on the pharmacokinetic parameters of ethinyl estradiol.
lithium generally should not be given with diuretics because they reduce its renal clearance and add a high risk of lithium toxicity.
edecrin may increase the ototoxic potential of other drugs such as aminoglycoside and some cephalosporin antibiotics.
a number of drugs, including ethacrynic acid, have been shown to displace warfarin from plasma protein;
in some patients, the administration of a non- steroidal antiinflammatory agent can reduce the diuretic, natriuretic, and antihypertensive effects of loop, potassium- sparing and thiazide diuretics.
therefore, when edecrin and non- steroidal anti- inflammatory agents are used concomitantly, the patient should be observed closely to determine if the desired effect of the diuretic is obtained.
antipsychotic drugs such as phenothiazines or haloperidol;
physiological changes resulting from smoking cessation, with or without nicotine replacement, may alter the pharmacokinetics of certain concomitant medications, such as tricyclic antidepressants and theophylline.
the risk of using bromocriptine mesylate in combination with other drugs has not been systematically evaluated, but alcohol may potentiate the side effects of bromocriptine mesylate.
bromocriptine mesylate may interact with dopamine antagonists, butyrophenones, and certain other agents.
compounds in these categories result in a decreased efficacy of bromocriptine mesylate: phenothiazines, haloperidol, metoclopramide, pimozide.
concomitant use of bromocriptine mesylate with other ergot alkaloids is not recommended.
antacids containing magnesium trisilicate, when administered concomitantly with nitrofurantoin, reduce both the rate and extent of absorption.
the mechanism for this interaction probably is adsorption of nitrofurantoin onto the surface of magnesium trisilicate.
uricosuric drugs, such as probenecid and sulfinpyrazone, can inhibit renal tubular secretion of nitrofurantoin.
the resulting increase in nitrofurantoin serum levels may increase toxicity, and the decreased urinary levels could lessen its efficacy as a urinary tract antibacterial.
alcohol, barbiturates, or narcotics: potentiation of orthostatic hypotension may occur.
antidiabetic drugs: (oral agents and insulin) - dosage adjustment of the antidiabetic drug may be required.
cholestyramine and colestipol resins: absorption of hydrochlorothiazide is impaired in the presence of anionic exchange resins.
single doses of either cholestyramine or colestipol resins bind the hydrochlorothiazide and reduce its absorption from the gastrointestinal tract by up to 85 and 43 percent, respectively.
corticosteroids, acth: intensified electrolyte depletion, particularly hypokalemia.
skeletal muscle relaxants, nondepolarizing (e.g., tubocurarine): possible increased responsiveness to the muscle relaxant.
lithium: generally should not be given with diuretics.
diuretic agents reduce the renal clearance of lithium and add a high risk of lithium toxicity.
refer to the package insert for lithium preparations before use of such preparations with hydrochlorothiazide.
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs: in some patients, the administration of a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agent can reduce the diuretic, natriuretic, and antihypertensive effects of loop, potassium-sparing and thiazide diuretics.
therefore, when hydrochlorothiazide and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents are used concomitantly, the patient should be observed closely to determine if the desired effect of the diuretic is obtained.
may interact with wthionamide (trecator-sc) and isoniazid (nydrazid).
however, neither phenobarbital nor diazepam appears to affect dantrium metabolism.
binding to plasma protein is not significantly altered by diazepam, diphenylhydantoin, or phenylbutazone.
binding to plasma proteins is reduced by warfarin and clotibrate and increased by tolbutamide.
the combination of therapeutic doses of intravenous dantrolene sodium and verapamil in halothane a-chloralose anesthetized swine has resulted in ventricular fibrillation and cardiovascular collapse in association with marked hyperkalemia.
it is recommended that the combination of intravenous dantrolene sodium and calcium channel blockers, such as verapamil, not be used together during the management of malignant hyperthermia crisis until the relevance of these findings to humans is established.
administration of dantrolene may potentiate vecuronium-induced neuromuscular block.
mercaptopurine/azathioprine: allopurinol inhibits the enzymatic oxidation of mercaptopurine and azathioprine to 6-thiouric acid.
in patients receiving mercaptopurine (purinethol) or azathioprine (imuran), the concomitant administration of 300-600 mg of allopurinol per day will require a reduction in dose to approximately one-third to one-fourth of the usual dose of mercaptopurine or azathioprine.
subsequent adjustment of doses of mercaptopurine or azathioprine should be made on the basis of therapeutic response and the appearance of toxic effects.
dicumarol: it has been reported that allopurinol prolongs the half-life of the anticoagulant, dicumarol.
the clinical basis of this drug interaction has not been established but should be noted when allopurinol is given to patients already on dicumarol therapy.
uricosuric agents: since the excretion of oxipurinol is similar to that of urate, uricosuric agents, which increase the excretion of urate, are also likely to increase the excretion of oxipurinol and thus lower the degree of inhibition of xanthine oxidase.
the concomitant administration of uricosuric agents and allopurinol has been associated with a decrease in the excretion of oxypurines (hypoxanthine and xanthine) and an increase in urinary uric acid excretion compared with that observed with allopurinol alone.
although clinical evidence to date has not demonstrated renal precipitation of oxypurines in patients either on allopurinol alone or in combination with uricosuric agents, the possibility should be kept in mind.
thiazide diuretics: the reports that the concomitant use of allopurinol and thiazide diuretics may contribute to the enhancement of allopurinol toxicity in some patients have been reviewed in an attempt to establish a cause-and-effect relationship and a mechanism of causation.
although a causal mechanism and a cause-and-effect relationship have not been established, current evidence suggests that renal function should be monitored in patients on thiazide diuretics and allopurinol even in the absence of renal failure, and dosage levels should be even more conservatively adjusted in those patients on such combined therapy if diminished renal function is detected..
ampicillin/amoxicillin: an increase in the frequency of skin rash has been reported among patients receiving ampicillin or amoxicillin concurrently with allopurinol compared to patients who are not receiving both drugs.
cytotoxic agents: enhanced bone marrow suppression by cyclophosphamide and other cytotoxic agents has been reported among patients with neoplastic disease, except leukemia, in the presence of allopurinol.
however, in a well-controlled study of patients with lymphoma on combination therapy, allopurinol did not increase the marrow toxicity of patients treated with cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, bleomycin, procarbazine and/or mechlorethamine.
chlorpropamide: chlorpropamides plasma half-life may be prolonged by allopurinol, since allopurinol and chlorpropamide may compete for excretion in the renal tubule.
the risk of hypoglycemia secondary to this mechanism may be increased if allopurinol and chlorpropamide are given concomitantly in the presence of renal insufficiency.
cyclosporin: reports indicate that cyclosporine levels may be increased during concomitant treatment with allopurinol sodium for injection.
monitoring of cyclosporine levels and possible adjustment of cyclosporine dosage should be considered when these drugs are co-administered.
itraconazole ketoconazole erythromycin clarithromycin telithromycin hiv protease inhibitors nefazodone cyclosporine large quantities of grapefruit juice ( 1 quart daily)
gemfibrozil other fibrates niacin (nicotinic acid) (=1 g/day)
danazol: the risk of myopathy/rhabdomyolysis is increased by concomitant administration of danazol particularly with higher doses of lovastatin (see warnings, myopathy/rhabdomyolysis).
amiodarone or verapamil: the risk of myopathy/rhabdomyolysis is increased when either amiodarone or verapamil is used concomitantly with a closely related member of the hmg-coa reductase inhibitor class (see warnings, myopathy/rhabdomyolysis).
coumarin anticoagulants: in a small clinical trial in which lovastatin was administered to warfarin treated patients, no effect on prothrombin time was detected.
however, another hmg-coa reductase inhibitor has been found to produce a less than two-second increase in prothrombin time in healthy volunteers receiving low doses of warfarin.
also, bleeding and/or increased prothrombin time have been reported in a few patients taking coumarin anticoagulants concomitantly with lovastatin.
it is recommended that in patients taking anticoagulants, prothrombin time be determined before starting lovastatin and frequently enough during early therapy to insure that no significant alteration of prothrombin time occurs.
lovastatin therapy has not been associated with bleeding or with changes in prothrombin time in patients not taking anticoagulants.
propranolol: in normal volunteers, there was no clinically significant pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic interaction with concomitant administration of single doses of lovastatin and propranolol.
digoxin: in patients with hypercholesterolemia, concomitant administration of lovastatin and digoxin resulted in no effect on digoxin plasma concentrations.
oral hypoglycemic agents: in pharmacokinetic studies of mevacor in hypercholesterolemic noninsulin dependent diabetic patients, there was no drug interaction with glipizide or with chlorpropamide
apraclonidine should not be used in patients receiving mao inhibitors..
although no specific drug interactions with topical glaucoma drugs or systemic medications were identified in clinical studies of iopidine 0.5% ophthalmic solution, the possibility of an additive or potentiating effect with cns depressants (alcohol, barbiturates, opiates, sedatives, anesthetics) should be considered.
tricyclic antidepressants have been reported to blunt the hypotensive effect of systemic clonidine.
an additive hypotensive effect has been reported with the combination of systemic clonidine and neuroleptic therapy.
since apraclonidine may reduce pulse and blood pressure, caution in using drugs such as beta-blockers (ophthalmic and systemic), antihypertensives, and cardiac glycosides is advised.
acetaminophen and methotrexate - l-methionine may decrease hepatic toxicity in those with acetaminophen overdosage or in those taking methotrexate.
gentamicin - methionine may protect against the ototoxic effects of gentamicin.
fluothane augments the action of non-depolarising muscle relaxants and the muscle relaxant effects of aminoglycosides.
fluothane may augment the hypotension caused by the ganglionic-blocking effect of tubocurarine.
caution should be exercised during the administration of adrenaline to patients anaesthetised with fluothane as arrhythmias may be precipitated.
for this reason the dose of adrenaline should be restricted and an antiarrhythmic agent administered as appropriate.
caution should also be applied for other sympathomimetics, and for aminophylline and theophylline and tricyclic antidepressants, which may also precipitate arrhythmias.
it is, however, possible that concomitant use of other known photosensitizing agents such as griseofulvin, thiazide diuretics, sulfonylureas, phenothiazines, sulfonamides and tetracyclines might increase the photosensitivity reaction of actinic keratoses treated with the levulan kerastick for topical solution.
drugs which may enhance the neuromuscular blocking action of tracrium include: enflurane;
certain antibiotics, especially the aminoglycosides and polymyxins;
drugs which may enhance the neuromuscular blocking action of tracrium include: enflurane;isoflurane;halothane;certain antibiotics, especially the aminoglycosides and polymyxins;lithium;magnesium salts;procainamide;and quinidine.
the prior administration of succinylcholine does not enhance the duration, but quickens the onset and may increase the depth, of neuromuscular block induced by tracrium.
tracrium should not be administered until a patient has recovered from succinylcholine-induced neuromuscular block.
cytosine arabinoside, a cytostatic agent, has been reported to inactivate the antifungal activity of flucytosine by competitive inhibition.
before using this medication, tell your doctor or pharmacist of all prescription and nonprescription products you may use, especially of: aminoglycosides (e.g., gentamicin, amikacin), amphotericin b, cyclosporine, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (e.g., ibuprofen), tacrolimus, vancomycin.
decreased levels of anti-factor xa and antithrombin iii, decreased antithrombin iii activity;
increased levels of fibrinogen and fibrinogen activity;
other binding proteins may be elevated in serum, (i.e., corticosteroid binding globulin (cbg), sex hormone binding globulin (shbg)) leading to increased total circulating corticosteroids and sex steroids, respectively.
eprosartan has been shown to have no effect on the pharmacokinetics of digoxin and the pharmacodynamics of warfarin and glyburide.
because eprosartan is not metabolized by the cytochrome p450 system, inhibitors of cyp450 enzyme would not be expected to affect its metabolism, and ketoconazole and fluconazole, potent inhibitors of cyp3a and 2c9, respectively, have been shown to have no effect on eprosartan pharmacokinetics.
ranitidine also has no effect on eprosartan pharmacokinetics.
eprosartan (up to 400 mg b.i.d. or 800 mg q.d.) doses have been safely used concomitantly with a thiazide diuretic (hydrochlorothiazide).
eprosartan doses of up to 300 mg b.i.d. have been safely used concomitantly with sustained-release calcium channel blockers (sustained-release nifedipine) with no clinically significant adverse interactions.
pharmacologic studies indicate that there may be additive effects in prolonging av conduction when using beta-blockers or digitalis concomitantly with tiazac.
controlled and uncontrolled domestic studies suggest that concomitant use of diltiazem hydrochloride and beta-blockers is usually well tolerated, but available data are not sufficient to predict the effects of concomitant treatment in patients with left ventricular dysfunction or cardiac conduction abnormalities.
administration of diltiazem hydrochloride concomitantly with propranolol in five normal volunteers resulted in increased propranolol levels in all subjects and bioavailability of propranolol was increased approximately 50%.
in vitro, propranolol appears to be displaced from its binding sites by diltiazem.
if combination therapy is initiated or withdrawn in conjunction with propranolol, an adjustment in the propranolol dose may be warranted.
a study in six healthy volunteers has shown a significant increase in peak diltiazem plasma levels (58%) and auc (53%) after a 1-week course of cimetidine 1200 mg/day and a single dose of diltiazem 60mg.
the effect may be mediated by cimetidines known inhibition of hepatic cytochrome p-450, the enzyme system responsible for the first-pass metabolism of diltiazem.
patients currently receiving diltiazem therapy should be carefully monitored for a change in pharmacological effect when initiating and discontinuing therapy with cimetidine.
administration of diltiazem hydrochloride with digoxin in 24 healthy male subjects increased plasma digoxin concentrations approximately 20%.
since there have been conflicting results regarding the effect of digoxin levels, it is recommended that digoxin levels be monitored when initiating, adjusting, and discontinuing diltiazem hydrochloride therapy to avoid possible over- or under-digitalization.
the depression of cardiac contractility, conductivity, and automaticity as well as the vascular dilation associated with anesthetics may be potentiated by calcium channel blockers.
when used concomitantly, anesthetics and calcium channel blockers should be titrated carefully.
a pharmacokinetic interaction between diltiazem and cyclosporine has been observed during studies involving renal and cardiac transplant patients.
in renal and cardiac transplant recipients, a reduction of cyclosporine dose ranging from 15% to 48% was necessary to maintain cyclosporine trough concentrations similar to those seen prior to the addition of diltiazem.
if these agents are to be administered concurrently, cyclosporine concentrations should be monitored, especially when diltiazem therapy is initiated, adjusted, or discontinued.
the effect of cyclosporine on diltiazem plasma concentrations has not been evaluated.
concomitant administration of diltiazem with carbamazepine has been reported to result in elevated serum levels of carbamazepine (40% to 72% increase), resulting in toxicity in some cases.
studies showed that diltiazem increased the auc of midazolam and triazolam by 3-4 fold and the cmax by 2-fold, compared to placebo.
the elimination half life of midazolam and triazolam also increased (1.5-2.5 fold) during coadministration with diltiazem.
these pharmacokinetic effects seen during diltiazem coadministration can result in increased clinical effects (e.g., prolonged sodation)of both midazolam and triazolam.
in a ten-subject study, coadministration of diltiazem (120 mg bid) with lovastatin resulted in a 3-4 times increase in mean lovastatin auc and cmax vs. lovastatin alone;
no change in pravastatin auc and cmax was observed during diltiazem coadministration.
diltiazem plasma levels were not significantly affected by lovastatin or pravastatin.
coadministration of rifampin with diltiazem lowered the diltiazem plasma concentrations to undetectable levels.
coadministration of diltiazem with rifampin or any known cyp3a4 inducer should be avoided when possible, and alternative therapy considered.
results from human in vitro metabolism studies and nonclinical studies show that revlimid  (lenalidomide) is neither metabolized by nor inhibits or induces the cytochrome p450 pathway suggesting that lenalidomide is not likely to cause or be subject to p450-based metabolic drug interactions in man.
co-administration of multiple doses of 10 mg of lenalidomide had no effect on the single dose pharmacokinetics of r- and s- warfarin.
co-administration of single 25-mg dose warfarin had no effect on the pharmacokinetics of total lenalidomide.
expected changes in laboratory assessments of pt and inr were observed after warfarin administration, but these changes were not affected by concomitant lenalidomide administration.
tablets: the benzodiazepines, including lorazepam, produce cns-depressant effects when administered with such medications as barbiturates or alcohol.
injection: lorazepam injection, like other injectable benzodiazepines, produces depression of the central nervous system when administered with ethyl alcohol, phenothiazines, barbiturates, mao inhibitors, and other antidepressants.when scopolamine is used concomitantly with injectable lorazepam, an increased incidence of sedation, hallucinations, and irrational behavior has been observed.
although studies designed to examine drug interactions have not been done, it was noted that corticosteroid or acth treatment of relapses for periods of up to 28 days has been administered to patients (n=180) receiving betaseron.
betaseron administration to three cancer patients over a dose range of 0.025 mg to 2.2 mg led to a dose-dependent inhibition of antipyrine elimination.14 the effect of alternate-day administration of 0.25 mg of betaseron on drug metabolism in ms patients is unknown.
hypotension - patients on diuretic therapy: patients on diuretics, and especially those in whom diuretic therapy was recently instituted, may occasionally experience an excessive reduction of blood pressure after initiation of therapy with prinivil.
the possibility of hypotensive effects with prinivil can be minimized by either discontinuing the diuretic or increasing the salt intake prior to initiation of treatment with prinivil.
if it is necessary to continue the diuretic, initiate therapy with prinivil at a dose of 5 mg daily, and provide close medical supervision after the initial dose until blood pressure has stabilized.
when a diuretic is added to the therapy of a patient receiving prinivil, an additional antihypertensive effect is usually observed.
studies with ace inhibitors in combination with diuretics indicate that the dose of the ace inhibitor can be reduced when it is given with a diuretic.
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents: in some patients with compromised renal function who are being treated with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, the co-administration of lisinopril may result in a further deterioration of renal function.
reports suggest that nsaids may diminish the antihypertensive effect of ace inhibitors, including lisinopril.
this interaction should be given consideration in patients taking nsaids concomitantly with ace inhibitors.
in a study in 36 patients with mild to moderate hypertension where the antihypertensive effects of prinivil alone were compared to prinivil given concomitantly with indomethacin, the use of indomethacin was associated with a reduced antihypertensive effect, although the difference between the two regimens was not significant.
other agents: prinivil has been used concomitantly with nitrates and/or digoxin without evidence of clinically significant adverse interactions.
no clinically important pharmacokinetic interactions occurred when prinivil was used concomitantly with propranolol or hydrochlorothiazide.
agents increasing serum potassium: prinivil attenuates potassium loss caused by thiazide-type diuretics.
use of prinivil with potassium-sparing diuretics (e.g., spironolactone, triamterene, or amiloride), potassium supplements, or potassium-containing salt substitutes may lead to significant increases in serum potassium.
lithium: lithium toxicity has been reported in patients receiving lithium concomitantly with drugs which cause elimination of sodium, including ace inhibitors.
lithium toxicity was usually reversible upon discontinuation of lithium and the ace inhibitor.
it is recommended that serum lithium levels be monitored frequently if prinivil is administered concomitantly with lithium.
cytadren accelerates the metabolism of dexamethasone;
therefore, if glucocorticoid replacement is needed, hydrocortisone should be prescribed.
aminoglutethimide diminishes the effect of coumarin and warfarin.
drug/ laboratory test interactions certain endocrine and liver function tests may be affected by estrogen-containing oral contraceptives.
hypotension   patients on diuretic therapy: patients on diuretics and especially those in whom diuretic therapy was recently instituted, as well as those on severe dietary salt restriction or dialysis, may occasionally experience a precipitous reduction of blood pressure usually within the first hour after receiving the initial dose of captopril.
the possibility of hypotensive effects with captopril can be minimized by either discontinuing the diuretic or increasing the salt intake approximately one week prior to initiation of treatment with captopril (captopril tablets, usp) or initiating therapy with small doses (6.25 or 12.5 mg).
agents having vasodilator activity: data on the effect of concomitant use of other vasodilators in patients receiving captopril for heart failure are not available;
therefore, nitroglycerin or other nitrates (as used for management of angina) or other drugs having vasodilator activity should, if possible, be discontinued before starting captopril.
agents causing renin release captopril's effect will be augmented by antihypertensive agents that cause renin release.
for example, diuretics (e.g., thiazides) may activate the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system.
agents affecting sympathetic activity the sympathetic nervous system may be especially important in supporting blood pressure in patients receiving captopril alone or with diuretics.
therefore, agents affecting sympathetic activity (e.g., ganglionic blocking agents or adrenergic neuron blocking agents) should be used with caution.
beta-adrenergic blocking drugs add some further antihypertensive effect to captopril, but the overall response is less than additive.
potassium-sparing diuretics such as spironolactone, triamterene, or amiloride, or potassium supplements should be given only for documented hypokalemia, and then with caution, since they may lead to a significant increase of serum potassium.
inhibitors of endogenous prostaglandin synthesis it has been reported that indomethacin may reduce the antihypertensive effect of captopril, especially in cases of low renin hypertension.
other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents (e.g., aspirin) may also have this effect.
lithium: increased serum lithium levels and symptoms of lithium toxicity have been reported in patients receiving concomitant lithium and ace inhibitor therapy.
if a diuretic is also used, it may increase the risk of lithium toxicity.
cardiac glycosides: in a study of young healthy male subjects no evidence of a direct pharmacokinetic captopril-digoxin interaction could be found.
loop diuretics: furosemide administered concurrently with captopril does not alter the pharmacokinetics of captopril in renally impaired hypertensive patients.
allopurinol: in a study of healthy male volunteers no significant pharmacokinetic interaction occurred when captopril and allopurinol were administered concomitantly for 6 days.
taking amyl nitrite after drinking alcohol may worsen side effects and may cause severe hypotension and cardiovascular collapse.
may interact anticoagulants (altered hypo-prothrombinemic effect), barbiturates, rifampin and other inducers of hepatic microsomal enzyme oxidation system (decreased effect of diethylstilbestrol), corticosteroids (increased effect of corticosteroids).
diamox modifies phenytoin metabolism with increased serum levels of phenytoin.
by decreasing the gastrointestinal absorption of primidone, diamox may decrease serum concentrations of primidone and its metabolites, with a consequent possible decrease in anticonvulsant effect.
caution is advised when beginning, discontinuing, or changing the dose of diamox in patients receiving primidone.
acetazolamide may increase the effects of other folic acid antagonists.
acetazolamide decreases urinary excretion of amphetamine and may enhance the magnitude and duration of their effect.
acetazolamide reduces urinary excretion of quinidine and may enhance its effect.
acetazolamide may prevent the urinary antiseptic effect of methenamine.
acetazolamide increases lithium excretion and the lithium may be decreased.
acetazolamide and sodium bicarbonate used concurrently increases the risk of renal calculus formation.
acetazolamide may elevate cyclosporine levels.
terfenadine: in a prospective study involving six-healthy-male volunteers, dirithromycin did not affect the metabolism of terfenadine.
these six volunteers received terfenadine alone (60 mg twice daily) for 8 days, followed by terfenadine in combination with dirithromycin (500 mg once daily) for 10 days.
the pharmacokinetics of terfenadine and its acid metabolite and the electrocardiographic qt c interval were measured during both periods: with terfenadine alone, and with terfenadine plus dirithromycin.
in one man, the c max of terfenadine was 8.1 ng/ml with terfenadine alone and 7.2 ng/ml with terfenadine plus dirithromycin.
the mean qt c interval (msec) was 369 with terfenadine alone and 367 with terfenadine plus dirithromycin.
also, in vitro experiments demonstrated a lack of interaction between dirithromycin and terfenadine.
thus, the interaction observed between erythromycin and terfenadine is not expected for dirithromycin.
serious cardiac dysrhythmias, some resulting in death, have occurred in patients receiving terfenadine concomitantly with other macrolide antibiotics.
in addition, most macrolides are contraindicated in patients receiving terfenadine therapy who have pre-existing cardiac abnormalities (arrhythmia, bradycardia, qt c interval prolongation, ischemic heart disease, congestive heart failure, etc.) or electrolyte disturbances.
theophylline: following co-administration of two 250-mg dirithromycin tablets administered once daily with 200-mg theophylline tablets administered twice daily for 10 days to 14 healthy subjects, the steady-state plasma concentration of theophylline was not significantly altered.
in general, most patients treated with dirithromycin who are receiving concomitant theophylline therapy may not require empiric adjustment of theophylline dosage or monitoring of theophylline plasma concentrations.
however, theophylline plasma concentrations should be monitored, with dosage adjustment as appropriate, in patients whose pulmonary disease requires maintaining a given theophylline plasma concentration for optimal pulmonary function or in patients with theophylline concentrations at the higher end of the therapeutic range.
antacids or h 2 receptor antagonists: when dirithromycin is administered immediately following antacids or h 2 -receptor antagonists, the absorption of dirithromycin is slightly enhanced.
triazolam: erythromycin has been reported to decrease the clearance of triazolam and, thus, may increase the pharmacologic effect of triazolam.
digoxin: concomitant administration of erythromycin and digoxin has been reported to result in elevated digoxin serum levels.
anticoagulants: there have been reports of increased anticoagulant effects when erythromycin and oral anticoagulants were used concomitantly.
ergotamine: concurrent use of erythromycin and ergotamine or dihydroergotamine has been associated in some patients with acute ergot toxicity characterized by severe peripheral vasospasm and dysesthesia.
other drugs drug interactions have been reported with concomitant administration of erythromycin and other medications, including cyclosporine, hexobarbital, carbamazepine, alfentanil, disopyramide, phenytoin, bromocriptine, valproate, astemizole, and lovastatin.
welchol  was found to have no significant effect on the bioavailability of digoxin, lovastatin, metoprolol, quinidine, valproic acid, and warfarin.
welchol  decreased the cmax and auc of sustained-release verapamil (calan sr ) by approximately 31% and 11%, respectively.
in clinical studies, coadministration of welchol  with atorvastatin, lovastatin, or simvastatin did not interfere with the lipid-lowering activity of the hmg-coa reductase inhibitor.
therefore, caution should be used when administering nitazoxanide concurrently with other highly plasma protein-bound drugs with narrow therapeutic indices, as competition for binding sites may occur (e.g., warfarin).
studies to evaluate possible interactions between revia and drugs other than opiates have not been performed.
the safety and efficacy of concomitant use of revia and disulfiram is unknown, and the concomitant use of two potentially hepatotoxic medications is not ordinarily recommended unless the probable benefits outweigh the known risks.
lethargy and somnolence have been reported following doses of revia and thioridazine.
patients taking revia may not benefit from opioid containing medicines, such as cough and cold preparations, antidiarrheal preparations, and opioid analgesics.
in an emergency situation when opioid analgesia must be administered to a patient receiving revia, the amount of opioid required may be greater than usual, and the resulting respiratory depression may be deeper and more prolonged.
for information on the pharmacokinetics of gemzar and cisplatin in combination, see drug interactions under clinical pharmacology section.
before taking glimepiride, tell your doctor if you are taking any of the following medicines: - aspirin or another salicylate such as magnesium/choline salicylate (trilisate), salsalate (disalcid, others), choline salicylate (arthropan), magnesium salicylate (magan), or bismuth subsalicylate (pepto-bismol);
- a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (nsaid) such as ibuprofen (motrin, advil, nuprin, others), ketoprofen (orudis, orudis kt, oruvail), diclofenac (voltaren, cataflam), etodolac (lodine), indomethacin (indocin), nabumetone (relafen), oxaprozin (daypro), and naproxen (anaprox, naprosyn, aleve);
- a sulfa-based drug such as sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim (bactrim, septra), sulfisoxazole (gantrisin), or sulfasalazine (azulfidine);
- a monoamine oxidase inhibitor (maoi) such as isocarboxazid (marplan), tranylcypromine (parnate), or phenelzine (nardil);
- a beta-blocker such as propranolol (inderal), atenolol (tenormin), acebutolol (sectral), metoprolol (lopressor), and others;
- a diuretic (water pill) such as hydrochlorothiazide (hctz, hydrodiuril), chlorothiazide (diuril), and others;
- a steroid medicine such as prednisone (deltasone, orasone, others), methylprednisolone (medrol, others), prednisolone (prelone, pediapred, others), and others;
- a phenothiazine such as chlorpromazine (thorazine), fluphenazine (prolixin, permitil), prochlorperazine (compazine), promethazine (phenergan), and others;
- phenytoin (dilantin);
- isoniazid (nydrazid);
- rifampin (rifadin, rifamate);
probenecid: as with other b-lactam antibiotics, renal excretion of loracarbef is inhibited by probenecid and resulted in an approximate 80% increase in the auc for loracarbef.
furosemide may increase the ototoxic potential of aminoglycoside antibiotics, especially in the presence of impaired renal function.
furosemide should not be used concomitantly with ethacrynic acid because of the possibility of ototoxicity.
patients receiving high doses of salicylates concomitantly with furosemide, as in rheumatic disease, may experience salicylate toxicity at lower doses because of competitive renal excretory sites.
furosemide has a tendency to antagonize the skeletal muscle relaxing effect of tubocurarine and may potentiate the action of succinylcholine.
lithium generally should not be given with diuretics because they reduce lithiums renal clearance and add a high risk of lithium toxicity.
furosemide may add to or potentiate the therapeutic effect of other antihypertensive drugs.
potentiation occurs with ganglionic or peripheral adrenergic blocking drugs.
furosemide may decrease arterial responsiveness to norepinephrine.
tablets simultaneous administration of sucralfate and furosemide tablets may reduce the natriuretic and antihypertensive effects of furosemide.
the intake of furosemide and sucralfate should be separated by at least two hours.
tablets, injection, and oral solution one study in six subjects demonstrated that the combination of furosemide and acetylsalicylic acid temporarily reduced creatinine clearance in patients with chronic renal insufficiency.
there are case reports of patients who developed increased bun, serum creatinine and serum potassium levels, and weight gain when furosemide was used in conjunction with nsaids.
literature reports indicate that coadministration of indomethacin may reduce the natriuretic and antihypertensive effects of furosemide in some patients by inhibiting prostaglandin synthesis.
patients receiving both indomethacin and furosemide should be observed closely to determine if the desired diuretic and/or antihypertensive effect of furosemide is achieved.
aminoglycosides: the mixing of piperacillin with an aminoglycoside in vitro can result in substantial inactivation of the aminoglycoside.
vecuronium: when used in the perioperative period, piperacillin has been implicated in the prolongation of the neuromuscular blockade of vecuronium.
in one controlled clinical study, the ureidopenicillins, including piperacillin, were reported to prolong the action of vecuronium.
due to their similar mechanism of action, it is expected that the neuromuscular blockade produced by any of the non-depolarizing muscle relaxants could be prolonged in the presence of piperacillin.
probenecid: the oral combination of probenecid before intramuscular injection of pipracil produces an increase in piperacillin peak serum level of about 30%.
anticoagulants: coagulation parameters should be tested more frequently and monitored regularly during simultaneous administration of high doses of heparin, oral anticoagulants, or other drugs that may affect the blood coagulation system or the thrombocyte function.
methotrexate: piperacillin sodium may reduce the excretion of methotrexate.
drug/laboratory test interactions as with other penicillins, the administration of pipracil may result in a false-positive reaction for glucose in the urine using a copper-reduction method.
there have been reports of positive test results using the bio-rad laboratories platelia aspergillus eia test in patients receiving piperacillin/tazobactam injection who were subsequently found to be free of aspergillus infection.
certain antibiotic, cisplatin, cyclosporine, diuretic, foscarnet, and vaccines.
the co-administration of natrecor with iv vasodilators such as nitroglycerin, nitroprusside, milrinone, or iv ace inhibitors has not been evaluated (these drugs were not co-administered with natrecor in clinical trials).
co-administration of myobloc and aminoglycosides or other agents interfering with neuromuscular transmission (e.g., curare-like compounds) should only be performed with caution as the effect of the toxin may be potentiated.
clinical studies in healthy volunteers show that the pharmacokinetics of cancidas are not altered by itraconazole, amphotericin b, mycophenolate, nelfinavir, or tacrolimus.
cancidas has no effect on the pharmacokinetics of itraconazole, amphotericin b, or the active metabolite of mycophenolate.
cancidas reduced the blood auc0-12 of tacrolimus by approximately 20%, peak blood concentration (cmax) by 16%, and 12-hour blood concentration (c12hr) by 26% in healthy subjects when tacrolimus (2 doses of 0.1 mg/kg 12 hours apart) was administered on the 10th day of cancidas 70 mg daily, as compared to results from a control period in which tacrolimus was administered alone.
for patients receiving both therapies, standard monitoring of tacrolimus blood concentrations and appropriate tacrolimus dosage adjustments are recommended.
in two clinical studies, cyclosporine (one 4 mg/kg dose or two 3 mg/kg doses) increased the auc of caspofungin by approximately 35%.
cancidas did not increase the plasma levels of cyclosporine.
there were transient increases in liver alt and ast when cancidas and cyclosporine were co-administered.
a drug-drug interaction study with rifampin in healthy volunteers has shown a 30% decrease in caspofungin trough concentrations.
patients on rifampin should receive 70 mg of cancidas daily.
in addition, results from regression analyses of patient pharmacokinetic data suggest that co-administration of other inducers of drug clearance (efavirenz, nevirapine, phenytoin, dexamethasone, or carbamazepine) with cancidas may result in clinically meaningful reductions in caspofungin concentrations.
when cancidas is co-administered with inducers of drug clearance, such as efavirenz, nevirapine, phenytoin, dexamethasone, or carbamazepine, use of a daily dose of 70 mg of cancidas should be considered
also, the potential for hepatic injury should be considered when rebif  is used in combination with other products associated with hepatic injury, or when new agents are added to the regimen of patients already on rebif .
central nervous system depressant (cns) drugs including alcohol, antidepressants, antihistamines, antipsychotics, blood pressure medications (reserpine, methyldopa, beta-blockers), motion sickness medications, muscle relaxants, narcotics, sedatives, sleeping pills and tranquilizers
particular caution should be exercised in using preparations containing sulfur, resorcinol, or salicylic acid in combination with differin gel.
increased toxicity (cns depression): cns depressants, mao inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants, phenothiazines.
example inhibitors include azole antifungals, ciprofloxacin, clarithromycin, diclofenac, doxycycline, erythromycin, imatinib, isoniazid, nefazodone, nicardipine, propofol, protease inhibitors, quinidine, and verapamil.
caution should be exercised when the following drugs are administered concomitantly with lodosyn (carbidopa) given with levodopa or carbidopa-levodopa combination products.
dopamine d2 receptor antagonists (e.g., phenothiazines, butyrophenones, risperidone) and isoniazid may reduce the therapeutic effects of levodopa.
in addition, the beneficial effects of levodopa in parkinsons disease have been reported to be reversed by phenytoin and papaverine.
patients taking these drugs with lodosyn and levodopa or carbidopa-levodopa combination products should be carefully observed for loss of therapeutic response.
iron salts may reduce the bioavailability of carbidopa and levodopa.
although metoclopramide may increase the bioavailability of levodopa by increasing gastric emptying, metoclopramide may also adversely affect disease control by its dopamine receptor antagonistic properties.
if phenytoin or other hepatic enzyme inducers are taken concurrently with norpace or norpace cr, lower plasma levels of disopyramide may occur.
other antiarrhythmic drugs (eg, quinidine, procainamide, lidocaine, propranolol) have occasionally been used concurrently with norpace.
in healthy subjects, no significant drug-drug interaction was observed when norpace was coadministered with either propranolol or diazepam.
concomitant administration of norpace and quinidine resulted in slight increases in plasma disopyramide levels and slight decreases in plasma quinidine levels.
norpace does not increase serum digoxin levels.
patients taking disopyramide phosphate and erythromycin concomitantly may develop increased serum concentrations of disopyramide resulting in excessive widening of the qrs complex and/or prolongation of the q-t interval.
until data on possible interactions between verapamil and disopyramide phosphate are obtained, disopyramide should not be administered within 48 hours before or 24 hours after verapamil administration.
co-administration of probenecid with acyclovir has been shown to increase the mean half-life and the area under the concentration-time curve.
human growth hormone - concomitant use of l-glutamine and human growth hormone may enhance nutrient absorption in those with severe short bowel syndrome.
indomethacin - concomitant use of l-glutamine and indomethacin may ameliorate increased intestinal permeability caused by indomethacin.
methotrexate - there is one report that methotrexate may decrease the possible effectiveness of supplemental l-glutamine for chemotherapy-induced mucositis.
in another report, nine patients with breast cancer were reported to have decreased symptoms of methotrexate-related toxicity when given supplemental l-glutamine at a dose of 0.5 gram/kilogram/day.
paclitaxel - in one report, l-glutamine at a dose of 10 grams three times daily, given 24 hours after receiving paclitaxel, appeared to prevent the development of myalgia and arthralgia, adverse reactions of paclitaxel.
these medications have included heparin, warfarin, beta-adrenergic receptor blockers, calcium channel antagonists, angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors, intravenous and oral nitrates, ticlopidine, and aspirin.
heparin, other anticoagulants, thrombolytics, and anti platelet agents are associated with an increase in bleeding.
patients with haca titers may have allergic or hypersensitivity reactions when treated with other diagnostic or therapeutic monoclonal antibodies.
after multiple dosing, interferon beta-1a (avonex  30 mcg im once weekly) reduced tysabri  clearance by approximately 30%.
the similarity of the tysabri -associated adverse event profile between study 1 (without co-administered avonex ) and study 2 (with co-administered avonex ) indicates that this alteration in clearance does not necessitate reduction of the tysabri  dose to maintain safety, general).
results of studies in multiple sclerosis patients taking tysabri  and concomitant interferon beta-1a (avonex  30 mcg im once weekly) or glatiramer acetate were inconclusive with regard to the need for dose adjustment of the beta-interferon or glatiramer acetate.
prostin e2 may augment the activity of other oxytocic drugs.
isoflurane potentiates the muscle relaxant effect of all muscle relaxants, most notably nondepolarizing muscle relaxants, and mac (minimum alveolar concentration) is reduced by concomitant administration of n 2o.
results of preliminary studies in humans and rats suggest that nonabsorbable antacids given concurrently with lactulose may inhibit the desired lactulose-induced drop in colonic ph.
clinical interaction studies with cimetidine and warfarin indicated that the coadministration of femara with these drugs does not result in clinically- significant drug interactions.
(see clinical pharmacology) coadministration of femara and tamoxifen 20 mg daily resulted in a reduction of letrozole plasma levels by 38% on average.
in studies in normal volunteers, there was no pharmacodynamic interaction between intravenous iloprost and either nifedipine, diltiazem, or captopril.
however, iloprost has the potential to increase the hypotensive effect of vasodilators and antihypertensive agents.
since iloprost inhibits platelet function, there is a potential for increased risk of bleeding, particularly in patients maintained on anticoagulants.
during clinical trials, iloprost was used concurrently with anticoagulants, diuretics, cardiac glycosides, calcium channel blockers, analgesics, antipyretics, nonsteroidal antiinflammatories, corticosteroids, and other medications.
intravenous infusion of iloprost had no effect on the pharmacokinetics of digoxin.
acetylsalicylic acid did not alter the clearance (pharmacokinetics) of iloprost.
anafranil should not be used with mao inhibitors.
close supervision and careful adjustment of dosage are required when anafranil is administered with anticholinergic or sympathomimetic drugs.
several tricyclic antidepressants have been reported to block the pharmacologic effects of guanethidine, clonidine, or similar agents, and such an effect may be anticipated with cmi because of its structural similarity to other tricyclic antidepressants.
the plasma concentration of cmi has been reported to be increased by the concomitant administration of haloperidol;
plasma levels of several closely related tricyclic antidepressants have been reported to be increased by the concomitant administration of methylphenidate or hepatic enzyme inhibitors (e.g., cimetidine, fluoxetine) and decreased by the concomitant administration of hepatic enzyme inducers (e.g., barbiturates, phenytoin), and such an effect may be anticipated with cmi as well.
administration of cmi has been reported to increase the plasma levels of phenobarbital, if given concomitantly.
poor metabolizers have higher than expected lasma concentrations of tricyclic antidepressants (tcas) when given usual doses.
cimetidine) and many that are substrates for p450 2d6 (many other antidepressants, phenothiazines, and the type 1c antiarrhythmics propafenone and flecainide).
while all the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (ssris), e.g., fluoxetine, sertraline, paroxetine, and fluvoxamine, inhibit p450 2d6, they may vary in the extent of inhibition.
fluvoxamine has also been shown to inhibit p450 1a2, an isoform also involved in tcametabolism.
the extent to which ssri-tcainteractions may pose clinical problems will depend on the degree of inhibition and the pharmacokinetics of the ssri involved.
nevertheless, caution is indicated in the co-administration of tcas with any of the ssris and also in switching from one class to the other.
of particular importance, sufficient time must elapse before initiating tcatreatment in a patient being withdrawn from fluoxetine, given the long half-life of the parent and active metabolite (at least 5 weeks may be necessary).
concomitant use of agents in the tricyclic antidepressant class (which includes anafranil) with drugs that can inhibit cytochrome p450 2d6 may require lower doses than usually prescribed for either the tricyclic antidepressant agent or the other drug.
it is desirable to monitor tcaplasma levels whenever an agent of the tricyclic antidepressant class including anafranil is going to be co-administered with another drug known to be an inhibitor of p450 2d6 (and/or p450 1a2).
because anafranil is highly bound to serum protein, the administration of anafranil to patients taking other drugs that are highly bound to protein (e.g., warfarin, digoxin) may cause an increase in plasma concentrations of these drugs, potentially resulting in adverse effects.
a 30 to 45% increase in auc and cmax of nisoldipine was observed with concomitant administration of cimetidine 400 mg twice daily.
ranitidine 150 mg twice daily did not interact significantly with nisoldipine (auc was decreased by 15-20 %).
coadministration of phenytoin with 40 mg sular tablets in epileptic patients lowered the nisoldipine plasma concentrations to undetectable levels.
coadministration of sular with phenytoin or any known cyp3a4 inducer should be avoided and alternative antihypertensive therapy should be considered.
pharmacokinetic interactions between nisoldipine and beta-blockers (atenolol, propranolol) were variable and not significant.
propranolol attenuated the heart rate increase following administration of immediate release nisoldipine.
the blood pressure effect of sular tended to be greater in patients on atenolol than in patients on no other antihypertensive therapy.
quinidine at 648 mg bid decreased the bioavailability (auc) of nisoldipine by 26%, but not the peak concentration.
the immediate release, but not the coat-core formulation of nisoldipine increased plasma quinidine concentrations by about 20%.
no significant interactions were found between nisoldipine and warfarin or digoxin.
caution should also be taken in concurrent or serial use of other aminoglycosides and polymyxins because they may enhance neomycin s nephrotoxicity and/or ototoxicity and potentiate neomycin sulfate neuromuscular blocking effects.
oral neomycin inhibits the gastrointestinal absorption of penicillin v, oral vitamin b-12, methotrexate and 5-fluorouracil.
oral neomycin sulfate may enhance the effect of coumarin in anticoagulants by decreasing vitamin k availability.
nitrates: the concomitant use of bepridil with long- and short-acting nitrates has been safely tolerated in patients with stable angina pectoris.
sublingual nitroglycerin may be taken if necessary for the control of acute angina attacks during bepridil therapy.
beta-blocking agents: the concomitant use of bepridil and beta-blocking agents has been well tolerated in patients with stable angina.
digoxin: in controlled studies in healthy volunteers, bepridil hydrochloride either had no effect (one study) or was associated with modest increases, about 30% (two studies) in steady-state serum digoxin concentrations.
limited clinical data in angina patients receiving concomitant bepridil hydrochloride and digoxin therapy indicate no discernible changes in serum digoxin levels.
oral hypoglycemics: bepridil has been safely used in diabetic patients without significantly lowering their blood glucose levels or altering their need for insulin or oral hypoglycemic agents.
in general, these are drugs that have one or more pharmacologic activities similar to bepridil hydrochloride, including anti-arrhythmic agents such as quinidine and procainamide, cardiac glycosides and tricyclic anti-depressants.
anti-arrhythmics and tricyclic anti-depressants could exaggerate the prolongation of the qt interval observed with bepridil hydrochloride.
cardiac glycosides could exaggerate the depression of av nodal conduction observed with bepridil hydrochloride.
vitamin a: because of the relationship of accutane to vitamin a, patients should be advised against taking vitamin supplements containing vitamin a to avoid additive toxic effects
tetracyclines: concomitant treatment with accutane and tetracyclines should be avoided because accutane use has been associated with a number of cases of pseudotumor cerebri (benign intracranial hypertension), some of which involved concomitant use of tetracyclines
micro-dosed progesterone preparations: micro-dosed progesterone preparations (minipills that do not contain an estrogen) may be an inadequate method of contraception during accutane therapy.
although other hormonal contraceptives are highly effective, there have been reports of pregnancy from women who have used combined oral contraceptives, as well as topical/injectable/implantable/insertable hormonal birth control products.
it is not known if hormonal contraceptives differ in their effectiveness when used with accutane.
phenytoin: accutane has not been shown to alter the pharmacokinetics of phenytoin in a study in seven healthy volunteers.
no formal clinical studies have been conducted to assess if there is an interactive effect on bone loss between phenytoin and accutane.
systemic corticosteroids: systemic corticosteroids are known to cause osteoporosis.
no formal clinical studies have been conducted to assess if there is an interactive effect on bone loss between systemic corticosteroids and accutane.
antacids: administration of flurbiprofen to volunteers under fasting conditions, or with antacid suspension yielded similar serum flurbiprofen time profiles in young subjects (n=12).
anticoagulants: flurbiprofen like other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, has been shown to affect bleeding parameters in patients receiving anti-coagulants, and serious clinical bleeding has been reported.
the physician should be cautious when administering flurbiprofen to patients taking anticoagulants.
aspirin: concurrent administration of aspirin and flurbiprofen resulted in 50% lower serum flurbiprofen concentrations.
this effect of aspirin (which also lowers serum concentrations of other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs given with it) has been demonstrated in patients with rheumatoid arthritis (n= 15) as well as normal volunteers (n= 16).
concurrent use of flurbiprofen and aspirin is therefore not recommended.
beta-adrenergic blocking agents: the effect of flurbiprofen on blood pressure response to propranolol and atenolol was evaluated in men with mild uncomplicated hypertension (n = 10).
flurbiprofen pretreatment attenuated the hypotensive effect of a single dose of propranolol but not atenolol.
flurbiprofen did not affect the pharmacokinetic profile of either drug, and the mechanism under lying the interference with propranolols hypotensive effect is unknown.
patients taking both flurbiprofen and a beta-blocker should be monitored to ensure that a satisfactory hypotensive effect is achieved.
cimetidine, ranitidine: in normal volunteers (n=9), pretreatment with cimetidine or ranitidine did not affect flurbiprofen pharmacokinetics except that a small (13 %) but statistically significant increase in the area under the serum concentration curve of flurbiprofen resulted with cimetidine.
digoxin: studies of concomitant administration of flurbiprofen and digoxin to healthy men (n= 14) did not show a change in the steady state serum levels of either drug.
diuretics: studies in normal volunteers have shown that flurbiprofen like other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, can interfere with the effects of furosemide.
other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs that inhibit prostaglandin synthesis have been shown to interfere with thiazide diuretics in some studies and with potassium-sparing diuretics.
patients receiving flurbiprofen and furosemide or other diuretics should be observed closely to determine if the desired effect is obtained.
oral hypoglycemic agents: in one study, flurbiprofen was given to adult diabetics who were already receiving glyburide (n=4), metformin (n=2) chlorpropamide with phenformin (n= 3) or glyburide with phenformin (n=6).
although there was a slight reduction in blood sugar concentrations during concomitant administration of flurbiprofen and hypoglycemic agents, there were no signs or symptoms of hypoglycemia.
the vasodilating effects of isosorbide dinitrate may be additive with those of other vasodilators.
antidiabetic drug requirements (i.e., insulin) may be altered.
conversely, diethylpropion may interfere with antihypertensive drugs (i.e., guanethidine, a-methyldopa).
concurrent use of phenothiazines may antagonize the anorectic effect of diethylpropion.
the hypoglycemic action of sulfonylurea may be potentiated by certain drugs including nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents and other drugs that are highly protein bound, salicylates, sulfonamides, chloramphenicol, probenecid, coumarins, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, and beta adrenergic blocking agents.
these drugs include the thiazides and other diuretics, corticosteroids, phenothiazines, thyroid products, estrogens, oral contraceptives, phenytoin, nicotinic acid, sympathomimetics, calcium channel blocking drugs, and isoniazid.
since animal studies suggest that the action of barbiturates may be prolonged by therapy with chlorpropamide, barbiturates should be employed with caution.
in some patients, a disulfiram-like reaction may be produced by the ingestion of alcohol.
a potential interaction between oral miconazole and oral hypoglycemic agents leading to severe hypoglycemia has been reported.
in vitro data in human plasma indicate that doxazosin mesylate has no effect on protein binding of digoxin, warfarin, phenytoin or indomethacin.
doxazosin mesylate has been administered without any evidence of an adverse drug interaction to patients receiving thiazide diuretics, beta-blocking agents, and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
in a placebo-controlled trial in normal volunteers, the administration of a single 1 mg dose of doxazosin on day 1 of a four-day regimen of oral cimetidine (400 mg twice daily) resulted in a 10% increase in mean auc of doxazosin (p=0.006), and a slight but not statistically significant increase in mean cmax and mean half-life of doxazosin.
analgesic/anti-inflammatory (e.g., acetaminophen, aspirin, codeine and codeine combinations, ibuprofen, indomethacin).
antibiotics (e.g., erythromycin, trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole, amoxicillin).
antihistamines (e.g., chlorpheniramine).
cardiovascular agents (e.g., atenolol, hydrochlorothiazide, propranolol).
sedatives and tranquilizers (e.g., diazepam).
the benzodiazepines, including alprazolam, produce additive cns depressant effects when co-administered with other psychotropic medications, anticonvulsants, antihistaminics, ethanol, and other drugs which themselves produce cns depression.
the steady state plasma concentrations of imipramine and desipramine have been reported to be increased an average of 31% and 20%, respectively, by the concomitant administration of alprazolam tablets in doses up to 4 mg/day.
drugs that inhibit alprazolam metabolism via cytochrome p450 3a: the initial step in alprazolam metabolism is hydroxylation catalyzed by cytochrome p450 3a (cyp 3a).
drugs demonstrated to be cyp 3a inhibitors of possible clinical significance on the basis of clinical studies involving alprazolam (caution is recommended during coadministration with alprazolam): coadministration of fluoxetine with alprazolam increased the maximum plasma concentration of alprazolam by 46%, decreased clearance by 21%, increased half-life by 17%, and decreased measured psychomotor performance.
coadministration of propoxyphene decreased the maximum plasma concentration of alprazolam by 6%, decreased clearance by 38%, and increased half-life by 58%.
coadministration of oral contraceptives increased the maximum plasma concentration of alprazolam by 18%, decreased clearance by 22%, and increased half-life by 29%.
drugs and other substances demonstrated to be cyp 3a inhibitors on the basis of clinical studies involving benzodiazepines metabolized similarly to alprazolam or on the basis of in vitro studies with alprazolam or other benzodiazepines (caution is recommended during coadministration with alprazolam): available data from clinical studies of benzodiazepines other than alprazolam suggest a possible drug interaction with alprazolam for the following: diltiazem, isoniazid, macrolide antibiotics such as erythromycin and clarithromycin, and grapefruit juice.
data from in vitro studies of alprazolam suggest a possible drug interaction with alprazolam for the following: sertraline and paroxetine.
data from in vitro studies of benzodiazepines other than alprazolam suggest a possible drug interaction for the following: ergotamine, cyclosporine, amiodarone, nicardipine, and nifedipine.
the drug interaction studies with valdecoxib were performed both with valdecoxib and a rapidly hydrolyzed intravenous prodrug form.
aspirin: concomitant administration of aspirin with valdecoxib may result in an increased risk of gi ulceration and complications compared to valdecoxib alone.
because of its lack of anti-platelet effect valdecoxib is not a substitute for aspirin for cardiovascular prophylaxis.
in a parallel group drug interaction study comparing the intravenous prodrug form of valdecoxib at 40 mg bid (n=10) vs placebo (n=9), valdecoxib had no effect on in vitro aspirin-mediated inhibition of arachidonate- or collagen-stimulated platelet aggregation.
methotrexate: valdecoxib 10 mg bid did not show a significant effect on the plasma exposure or renal clearance of methotrexate.
ace-inhibitors:reports suggest that nsaids may diminish the antihypertensive effect of ace-inhibitors.
this interaction should be given consideration in patients taking bextra concomitantly with ace-inhibitors.
furosemide: clinical studies, as well as post-marketing observations, have shown that nsaids can reduce the natriuretic effect of furosemide and thiazides in some patients.
anticonvulsants (phenytoin): steady state plasma exposure (auc) of valdecoxib (40 mg bid for 12 days) was decreased by 27% when co-administered with multiple doses (300 mg qd for 12 days) of phenytoin (a cyp 3a4 inducer).
patients already stabilized on valdecoxib should be closely monitored for loss of symptom control with phenytoin coadministration.
valdecoxib did not have a statistically significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of phenytoin (a cyp 2c9 and cyp 2c19 substrate).
dextromethorphan: dextromethorphan is primarily metabolized by cyp 2d6 and to a lesser extent by 3a4.
coadministration with valdecoxib (40 mg bid for 7 days) resulted in a significant increase in dextromethorphan plasma levels suggesting that, at these doses, valdecoxib is a weak inhibitor of 2d6.
even so dextromethorphan plasma concentrations in the presence of high doses of valdecoxib were almost 5-fold lower than those seen in cyp 2d6 poor metabolizers suggesting that dose adjustment is not necessary.
lithium: valdecoxib 40 mg bid for 7 days produced significant decreases in lithium serum clearance (25%) and renal clearance (30%) with a 34% higher serum exposure compared to lithium alone.
lithium serum concentrations should be monitored closely when initiating or changing therapy with bextra in patients receiving lithium.
lithium carbonate (450 mg bid for 7 days) had no effect on valdecoxib pharmacokinetics.
warfarin: the effect of valdecoxib on the anticoagulant effect of warfarin (1 - 8 mg/day) was studied in healthy subjects by coadministration of bextra 40 mg bid for 7 days.
valdecoxib caused a statistically significant increase in plasma exposures of r-warfarin and s-warfarin (12% and 15%, respectively), and in the pharmacodynamic effects (prothrombin time, measured as inr) of warfarin.
anticoagulant therapy should be monitored, particularly during the first few weeks, after initiating therapy with bextra in patients receiving warfarin or similar agents.
fluconazole and ketoconazole: ketoconazole and fluconazole are predominantly cyp 3a4 and 2c9 inhibitors, respectively.
concomitant single dose administration of valdecoxib 20 mg with multiple doses of ketoconazole and fluconazole produced a significant increase in exposure of valdecoxib.
plasma exposure (auc) to valdecoxib was increased 62% when coadministered with fluconazole and 38% when coadministered with ketoconazole.
glyburide: glyburide is a cyp 2c9 substrate.
coadministration of valdecoxib (10 mg bid for 7 days) with glyburide (5 mg qd or 10 mg bid) did not affect the pharmacokinetics (exposure) of glyburide.
coadministration of valdecoxib (40 mg bid (day 1) and 40 mg qd (days 2-7)) with glyburide (5 mg qd) did not affect either the pharmacokinetics (exposure) or the pharmacodynamics (blood glucose and insulin levels) of glyburide.
coadministration of valdecoxib (40 mg bid (day 1) and 40 mg qd (days 2-7)) with glyburide (10 mg glyburide bid) resulted in 21% increase in glyburide auc0-12 and a 16% increase in glyburide cmax leading to a 16% decrease in glucose auc0-24.
because changes in glucose concentrations with valdecoxib coadministration were within the normal variability and individual glucose concentrations were above or near 70 mg/dl, dose adjustment for glyburide (5 mg qd and 10 mg bid) with valdecoxib coadministration (up to 40 mg qd) is not indicated.
coadministration of glyburide with doses higher than 40 mg valdecoxib (e.g., 40 mg bid) have not been studied.
omeprazole: omeprazole is a cyp 3a4 substrate and cyp 2c19 substrate and inhibitor.
valdecoxib steady state plasma concentrations (40 mg bid) were not affected significantly with multiple doses of omeprazole (40 mg qd).
coadministration with valdecoxib increased exposure of omeprazole (auc) by 46%.
drugs whose absorption is sensitive to ph may be negatively impacted by concomitant administration of omeprazole and valdecoxib.
however, because higher doses (up to 360 mg qd) of omeprazole are tolerated in zollinger-ellison (ze) patients, no dose adjustment for omeprazole is recommended at current doses.
coadministration of valdecoxib with doses higher than 40 mg qd omeprazole has not been studied.
oral contraceptives: valdecoxib (40 mg bid) did not induce the metabolism of the combination oral contraceptive norethindrone/ethinyl estradiol (1 mg /35 mcg combination, ortho-novum 1/35 ).
coadministration of valdecoxib and ortho-novum 1/35  increased the exposure of norethindrone and ethinyl estradiol by 20% and 34%, respectively.
these increased exposures of norethindrone and ethinyl estradiol should be taken into consideration when selecting an oral contraceptive for women taking valdecoxib.
diazepam: diazepam (valium) is a cyp 3a4 and cyp 2c19 substrate.
plasma exposure of diazepam (10 mg bid) was increased by 28% following administration of valdecoxib (40 mg bid) for 12 days, while plasma exposure of valdecoxib (40 mg bid) was not substantially increased following administration of diazepam (10 mg bid) for 12 days.
although the magnitude of changes in diazepam plasma exposure when coadministered with valdecoxib were not sufficient to warrant dosage adjustments, patients may experience enhanced sedative side effects caused by increased exposure of diazepam under this circumstance.
the coadministration of aspirin decreases the biologic half-life of fenoprofen because of an increase in metabolic clearance that results in a greater amount of hydroxylated fenoprofen in the urine.
although the mechanism of interaction between fenoprofen and aspirin is not totally known, enzyme induction and displacement of fenoprofen from plasma albumin binding sites are possibilities.
because nalfon has not been shown to produce any additional effect beyond that obtained with aspirin alone and because aspirin increases the rate of excretion of nalfon, the concomitant use of nalfon and salicylates is not recommended.
chronic administration of phenobarbital, a known enzyme inducer, may be associated with a decrease in the plasma half-life of fenoprofen.
when phenobarbital is added to or withdrawn from treatment, dosage adjustment of nalfon may be required.
patients receiving hydantoins, sulfonamides, or sulfonylureas should be observed for increased activity of these drugs and, therefore, signs of toxicity from these drugs.
in patients receiving coumarin-type anticoagulants, the addition of nalfon to therapy could prolong the prothrombin time.
patients treated with nalfon may be resistant to the effects of loop diuretics.
in patients receiving nalfon and a steroid concomitantly, any reduction in steroid dosage should be gradual in order to avoid the possible complications of sudden steroid withdrawal.
the risk of a potential interaction between novoseven and coagulation factor concentrates has not been adequately evaluated in preclinical or clinical studies.
simultaneous use of activated prothrombin complex concentrates or prothrombin complex concentrates should be avoided.
although the specific drug interaction was not studied in a clinical trial, there have been more than 50 episodes of concomitant use of antifibrinolytic therapies (i.e., tranexamic acid, aminocaproic acid) and novoseven.
population pharmacokinetic analyses revealed that mtx, nsaids, corticosteroids, and tnf blocking agents did not influence abatacept clearance.
the majority of patients in ra clinical studies received one or more of the following concomitant medications with orencia: mtx, nsaids, corticosteroids, tnf blocking agents, azathioprine, chloroquine, gold, hydroxychloroquine, leflunomide, sulfasalazine, and anakinra.
concurrent administration of a tnf antagonist with orencia has been associated with an increased risk of serious infections and no significant additional efficacy over use of the tnf antagonists alone.
concurrent therapy with orencia and tnf antagonists is not recommended.
there is insufficient experience to assess the safety and efficacy of orencia administered concurrently with anakinra, and therefore such use is not recommended.
concurrent administration of hexalen and antidepressants of the mao inhibitor class may cause severe orthostatic hypotension.cimetidine, an inhibitor of microsomal drug metabolism, increased altretamines half-life and toxicity in a rat model.
data from a randomized trial of hexalen and cisplatin plus or minus pyridoxine in ovarian cancer indicated that pyridoxine significantly reduced neurotoxicity;
however, it adversely affected response duration suggesting that pyridoxine should not be administered with hexalen and/or cisplatin.1
since zarontin (ethosuximide) may interact with concurrently administered antiepileptic drugs, periodic serum level determinations of these drugs may be necessary (eg, ethosuximide may elevate phenytoin serum levels and valproic acid has been reported to both increase and decrease ethosuximide levels).
when atropine and pralidoxime are used together, the signs of atropinization (flushing, mydriasis, tachycardia, dryness of the mouth and nose) may occur earlier than might be expected than when atropine is used alone because pralidoxime may potentiate the effect of atropine.
the following precautions should be kept in mind in the treatment of anticholinesterase poisoning although they do not bear directly on the use of atropine and pralidoxime.
since barbiturates are potentiated by the anticholinesterases, they should be used cautiously in the treatment of convulsions.
coumarin-type anticoagulants: several short-term controlled studies failed to wshow that ibuprofen significantly affected prothrombin times or a variety of other clotting factors when administered to individuals on coumarin-type anticoagulants.
however, because bleeding has been reported when ibuprofen and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents have been administered to patients on coumarin-type anticoagulants, the physician should be cautious when administering ibuprofen to patients on anticoagulants.
aspirin: animal studies wshow that aspirin given with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents, including ibuprofen, yields a net decrease in anti-inflammatory activity with lowered blood levels of the non-aspirin drug.
single dose bioavailability studies in normal volunteers have failed to wshow an effect of aspirin on ibuprofen blood levels.
methotrexate: ibuprofen, as well as other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, probably reduces the tubular secretion of methotrexate based on in vitro studies in rabbit kidney slices.
this may indicate that ibuprofen could enhance the toxicity of methotrexate.
caution should be used if ibuprofen is administered concomitantly with methotrexate.
h-2 antagonists: in studies with human volunteers, co-administration of cimetidine or ranitidine with ibuprofen had no substantive effect on ibuprofen serum concentrations.
furosemide: clinical studies, as well as random observations, have shown that ibuprofen can reduce the natriuretic effect of furosemide and thiazides in some patients.
during concomitant therapy with ibuprofen, the patient should be observed closely for signs of renal failure, as well as to assure diuretic efficacy.
lithium: ibuprofen produced an elevation of plasma lithium levels and a reduction in renal lithium clearance in a study of eleven normal volunteers.
the mean minimum lithium concentration increased 15% and the renal clearance of lithium was decreased by 19% during this period of concomitant drug administration.
thus, when ibuprofen and lithium are administered concurrently, subjects should be observed carefully for signs of lithium toxicity.
drug interaction studies have shown that esomeprazole does not have any clinically significant interactions with phenytoin, warfarin, quinidine, clarithromycin or amoxicillin.
post-marketing reports of changes in prothrombin measures have been received among patients on concomitant warfarin and esomeprazole therapy.
patients treated with proton pump inhibitors and warfarin concomitantly may need to be monitored for increases in inr and prothrombin time.
esomeprazole may potentially interfere with cyp2c19, the major esomeprazole metabolizing enzyme.
coadministration of esomeprazole 30 mg and diazepam, a cyp2c19 substrate, resulted in a 45% decrease in clearance of diazepam.
therefore, esomeprazole may interfere with the absorption of drugs where gastric ph is an important determinant of bioavailability (eg, ketoconazole, iron salts and digoxin).
coadministration of oral contraceptives, diazepam, phenytoin, or quinidine did not seem to change the pharmacokinetic profile of esomeprazole.
concomitant administration of clarithromycin with pimozide is contraindicated.
drug-drug interactions given the primary cns effects of aripiprazole, caution should be used when abilify is taken in combination with other centrally acting drugs and alcohol.
1- adrenergic receptor antagonism, aripiprazole has the potential to enhance the effect of certain antihypertensive agents.
potential for other drugs to affect abilify aripiprazole is not a substrate of cyp1a1, cyp1a2, cyp2a6, cyp2b6, cyp2c8, cyp2c9, cyp2c19, or cyp2e1 enzymes.
agents that induce cyp3a4 (eg, carbamazepine) could cause an increase in aripiprazole clearance and lower blood levels.
inhibitors of cyp3a4 (eg, ketoconazole) or cyp2d6 (eg, quinidine, fluoxetine, or paroxetine) can inhibit aripiprazole elimination and cause increased blood levels.
ketoconazole: coadministration of ketoconazole (200 mg/day for 14 days) with a 15-mg single dose of aripiprazole increased the auc of aripiprazole and its active metabolite by 63% and 77%, respectively.
when concomitant administration of ketoconazole with aripiprazole occurs, aripiprazole dose should be reduced to one-half of its normal dose.
quinidine: coadministration of a 10-mg single dose of aripiprazole with quinidine (166 mg/day for 13 days), a potent inhibitor of cyp2d6, increased the auc of aripiprazole by 112% but decreased the auc of its active metabolite, dehydroaripiprazole, by 35%.
aripiprazole dose should be reduced to one-half of its normal dose when concomitant administration of quinidine with aripiprazole occurs.
other significant inhibitors of cyp2d6, such as fluoxetine or paroxetine, would be expected to have similar effects and, therefore, should be accompanied by similar dose reductions.
carbamazepine: coadministration of carbamazepine (200 mg bid), a potent cyp3a4 inducer, with aripiprazole (30 mg qd) resulted in an approximate 70% decrease in cmax and auc values of both aripiprazole and its active metabolite, dehydro-aripiprazole.
when carbamazepine is added to aripiprazole therapy, aripiprazole dose should be doubled.
when carbamazepine is withdrawn from the combination therapy, aripiprazole dose should then be reduced.
no clinically significant effect of famotidine, valproate, or lithium was seen on the pharmacokinetics of aripiprazole (see clinical pharmacology: drug- drug interactions).
potential for abilify to affect other drugs aripiprazole is unlikely to cause clinically important pharmacokinetic interactions with drugs metabolized by cytochrome p450 enzymes.
in in vivo studies, 10- to 30-mg/day doses of aripiprazole had no significant effect on metabolism by cyp2d6 (dextromethorphan), cyp2c9 (warfarin), cyp2c19 (omeprazole, warfarin), and cyp3a4 (dextromethorphan) substrates.
additionally, aripiprazole and dehydroaripiprazole did not show potential for altering cyp1a2-mediated metabolism in vitro.
alcohol: there was no significant difference between aripiprazole coadministered with ethanol and placebo coadministered with ethanol on performance of gross motor skills or stimulus response in healthy subjects.
as with most psychoactive medications, patients should be advised to avoid alcohol while taking abilify
the following drug interactions have been identified involving nizoral tablets and other drugs metabolized by the cytochrome p450 3a4 enzyme system: ketoconazole tablets inhibit the metabolism of terfenadine, resulting in an increased plasma concentration of terfenadine and a delay in the elimination of its acid metabolite.
pharmacokinetic data indicate that oral ketoconazole inhibits the metabolism of astemizole, resulting in elevated plasma levels of astemizole and its active metabolite desmethylastemizole which may prolong qt intervals.
coadministration of astemizole with ketoconazole tablets is therefore contraindicated.
human pharmacokinetics data indicate that oral ketoconazole potently inhibits the metabolism of cisapride resulting in a mean eight-fold increase in auc of cisapride.
data suggest that coadministration of oral ketoconazole and cisapride can result in prolongation of the qt interval on the ecg.
therefore concomitant administration of ketoconazole tablets with cisapride is contraindicated.
ketoconazole tablets may alter the metabolism of cyclosporine, tacrolimus, and methylprednisolone, resulting in elevated plasma concentrations of the latter drugs.
dosage adjustment may be required if cyclosporine, tacrolimus, or methylprednisolone are given concomitantly with nizoral  tablets.
coadministration of nizoral  tablets with midazolam or triazolam has resulted in elevated plasma concentrations of the latter two drugs.
it is, therefore, advisable to monitor digoxin concentrations in patients receiving ketoconazole.
when taken orally , imidazole compounds like ketoconazole may enhance the anticoagulant effect of coumarin-like drugs.
in simultaneous treatment with imidazole drugs and coumarin drugs, the anticoagulant effect should be carefully titrated and monitored.
because severe hypoglycemia has been reported in patients concomitantly receiving oral miconazole (an imidazole) and oral hypoglycemic agents, such a potential interaction involving the latter agents when used concomitantly with ketoconazole tablets (an imidazole) can not be ruled out.
concomitant administration of ketoconazole tablets with phenytoin may alter the metabolism of one or both of the drugs.
it is suggested to monitor both ketoconazole and phenytoin.
concomitant administration of rifampin with ketoconazole tablets reduces the blood levels of the latter.
inh (isoniazid) is also reported to affect ketoconazole concentrations adversely.
after the coadministration of 200 mg oral ketoconazole twice daily and one 20 mg dose of loratadine to 11 subjects, the auc and cmax of loratadine averaged 302% (  142 s.d.) and 251% (  68 s.d.), respectively, of those obtained after co-treatment with placebo.
also, there were no clinically significant differences in adverse events when loratadine was administered with or without ketoconazole.
in clinical trials in patients undergoing ptca/pci, co-administration of angiomax with heparin, warfarin, thrombolytics or glycoprotein iib/iiia inhibitors was associated with increased risks of major bleeding events compared to patients not receiving these concomitant medications.
there is no experience with co-administration of angiomax and plasma expanders such as dextran.
among 494 subjects who received angiomax in clinical trials and were tested for antibodies, 2 subjects had treatment-emergent positive bivalirudin antibody tests.
iodine or iodine excess may decrease the effect of carbimazole, and an iodine deficiency can increase the effect of carbimazole.
serum concentration of digoxin and digitoxin may increase when patients take antithyroid agents.
antithyroid agents may decrease thyroidal uptake of sodium iodide i131, a rebound in uptake may occur up to 5 days after sudden withdrawal of carbimazole.
the in vitro interaction between nevirapine and the antithrombotic agent warfarin is complex.
when warfarin is co-administered with nevirapine, anticoagulation levels should be monitored frequently.
clarithromycin exposure was significantly decreased by nevirapine;
alternatives to clarithromycin,such as azithromycin, should be considered.
ethinyl estradiol and norethindrone
ethinyl estradiol norethindrone
oral contraceptives and other hormonalmethods of birth control should not be usedas the sole method of contraception inwomen taking nevirapine, since nevirapinemay lower the plasma levels of thesemedications.
nevirapine and ketoconazole should not beadministered concomitantly becausedecreases in ketoconazole plasmaconcentrations may reduce the efficacy of the drug.
lopinavir/ritonavir
a dose increase of lopinavir/ritonavir to 533/133 mg twice daily with food isrecommended in combination with nevirapine.
methadone levels may be decreased; increased dosages may be required to prevent symptoms of opiate withdrawal. methadone maintained patients beginning nevirapine therapy should be monitored forevidence of withdrawal and methadone dose should be adjusted accordingly.
the appropriate dose for nelfinavir incombination with nevirapine, with respectto safety and efficacy, has not been established.
nevirapine and rifampin should not beadministered concomitantly becausedecreases in nevirapine plasmaconcentrations may reduce the efficacy ofthe drug.
physicians needing to treatpatients co-infected with tuberculosis andusing a nevirapine containing regimen mayuse rifabutin instead.
abased on reports of narcotic withdrawal syndrome in patients treated with nevirapine and methadone concurrently, and evidence of decreased plasma concentrations of methadone.
amiodarone, disopyramide, lidocaine
carbamazepine, clonazepam, ethosuximide
diltiazem, nifedipine, verapamil
cyclosporin, tacrolimus, sirolimus
drug interaction with erythromycin and ketoconazole fexofenadine has been shown to exhibit minimal (ca. 5%) metabolism.
however, co  administration of fexofenadine hydrochloride with either ketoconazole or erythromycin led to increased plasma concentrations of fexofenadine.
fexofenadine had no effect on the pharmacokinetics of either erythromycin or ketoconazole.
in 2 separate studies, fexofenadine hydrochloride 120 mg twice daily (240 mg total daily dose) was co-administered with either erythromycin 500 mg every 8 hours or ketoconazole 400 mg once daily under steady-state conditions to healthy volunteers (n=24, each study).
no differences in adverse events or qtc interval were observed when subjects were administered fexofenadine hydrochloride alone or in combination with either erythromycin or ketoconazole.
the findings of these studies are summarized in the following table: effects on steady-state fexofenadine pharmacokinetics after 7 days of co-administration with fexofenadine hydrochloride 120 mg every 12 hours (two times the recommended twice daily dose) in healthy volunteers (n=24)
these studies indicate that ketoconazole or erythromycin co-administration enhances fexofenadine gastrointestinal absorption.
this observed increase in the bioavailability of fexofenadine may be due to transport-related effects, such as p-glycoprotein. in vivo animal studies also suggest that in addition to enhancing absorption, ketoconazole decreases fexofenadine gastrointestinal secretion, while erythromycin may also decrease biliary excretion.
drug interactions with antacids administration of 120 mg of fexofenadine hydrochloride (2 x 60 mg capsule) within 15 minutes of an aluminum and magnesium containing antacid (maalox ) decreased fexofenadine auc by 41% and cmax by 43%.
allegra should not be taken closely in time with aluminum and magnesium containing antacids.
therefore, to maximize the effects of fexofenadine, it is recommended that allegra should be taken with water
cyclopentolate may interfere with the anti-glaucoma action of carbachol or pilocarpine;
cholestyramine and charcoal administration of cholestyramine or activated charcoal in patients (n=13) and volunteers (n=96) resulted in a rapid and significant decrease in plasma m1 (the active metabolite of leflunomide) concentration .
in a small (n=30) combination study of arava with methotrexate, a 2- to 3-fold elevation in liver enzymes was seen in 5 of 30 patients.
nsaids: in in vitro studies, m1 was shown to cause increases ranging from 13 - 50% in the free fraction of diclofenac and ibuprofen at concentrations in the clinical range.
tolbutamide: in in vitro studies, m1 was shown to cause increases ranging from 13 - 50% in the free fraction of tolbutamide at concentrations in the clinical range.
rifampin: following concomitant administration of a single dose of arava to subjects receiving multiple doses of rifampin, m1 peak levels were increased (~40%) over those seen when arava was given alone.
because of the potential for arava levels to continue to increase with multiple dosing, caution should be used if patients are to be receiving both arava and rifampin.
warfarin: increased inr (international normalized ratio) when arava and warfarin were co-administered has been rarely reported.
in addition, several aed s that are cytochrome p450 inducers can decrease plasma concentrations of oxcarbazepine and mhd.
results demonstrate that oxcarbazepine and its pharmacologically active 10-monohydroxy metabolite (mhd) have little or no capacity to function as inhibitors for most of the human cytochrome p450 enzymes evaluated (cyp1a2, cyp2a6, cyp2c9, cyp2d6, cyp2e1, cyp4a9 and cyp4a11) with the exception of cyp2c19 and cyp3a4/5.
although inhibition of cyp 3a4/5 by oxc and mhd did occur at high concentrations, it is not likely to be of clinical significance.
the inhibition of cyp-2c19 by oxc and mhd, however, is clinically relevant.
increases of 22% with mhd and 47% with oxcarbazepine were observed.
as mhd, the predominant plasma substrate, is only a weak inducer of udp-glucuronyl transferase, it is unlikely to have an effect on drugs that are mainly eliminated by conjugation through udp-glucuronyl transferase (e.g., valproic acid, lamotrigine).
in addition, oxcarbazepine and mhd induce a subgroup of the cytochrome p450 3a family (cyp3a4 and cyp3a5) responsible for the metabolism of dihydropyridine calcium antagonists and oral contraceptives, resulting in a lower plasma concentration of these drugs.
antiepileptic drugs: potential interactions between trileptal and other aeds were assessed in clinical studies.
influence of trileptal on aed concentration (mean change, 90% confidence interval)
influence of aed on mhd concentration (mean change, 90% confidence interval)
1- nc denotes a mean change of less than 10% 2- pediatrics 3- mean increase in adults at high trileptal doses in vivo, the plasma levels of phenytoin increased by up to 40%, when trileptal was given at doses above 1200 mg/day.
therefore, when using doses of trileptal greater than 1200 mg/day during adjunctive therapy, a decrease in the dose of phenytoin may be required.
the increase of phenobarbital level, however, is small (15%) when given with trileptal.
strong inducers of cytochrome p450 enzymes (i.e. carbamazepine, phenytoin and phenobarbital) have been shown to decrease the plasma levels of mhd (29-40%).
hormonal contraceptives co-administration of trileptal with an oral contraceptive has been shown to influence the plasma concentrations of the two hormonal components, ethinylestradiol (ee) and levonorgestrel (lng).
therefore, concurrent use of trileptal with hormonal contraceptives may render these contraceptives less effective.
calcium antagonists: after repeated co-administration of trileptal, the auc of felodipine was lowered by 28% [90% ci: 20-33].
verapamil produced a decrease of 20% [90% ci: 18-27] of the plasma levels of mhd.
other drug interactions cimetidine, erythromycin and dextropropoxyphene had no effect on the pharmacokinetics of mhd.
results with warfarin wshow no evidence of interaction with either single or repeated doses of trileptal.
renal function should be monitored carefully if high doses of aminoglycosides are to be administered with maxipime because of the increased potential of nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity of aminoglycoside antibiotics.
nephrotoxicity has been reported following concomitant administration of other cephalosporins with potent diuretics such as furosemide.
additional reductions in blood pressure may occur when flolan is administered with diuretics, antihypertensive agents, or other vasodilators.
when other antiplatelet agents or anticoagulants are used concomitantly, there is the potential for flolan to increase the risk of bleeding.
however, patients receiving infusions of flolan in clinical trials were maintained on anticoagulants without evidence of increased bleeding.
in clinical trials, flolan was used with digoxin, diuretics, anticoagulants, oral vasodilators, and supplemental oxygen.in a pharmacokinetic substudy in patients with congestive heart failure receiving furosemide or digoxin in whom therapy with flolan was initiated, apparent oral clearance values for furosemide (n = 23) and digoxin (n = 30) were decreased by 13% and 15%, respectively, on the second day of therapy and had returned to baseline values by day 87.
however, patients on digoxin may show elevations of digoxin concentrations after initiation of therapy with flolan, which may be clinically significant in patients prone to digoxin toxicity.
anticoagulants including coumarin derivatives, indandione derivatives, and platelet aggregation inhibitors such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (nsaids), and aspirin may increase the risk of bleeding when administered concomitantly with ardeparin.
synergism between xanthine bronchodilators (e.g., theophylline), ephedrine, and other sympathomimetic bronchodilators has been reported.
concurrent administration of dyphylline and probenecid, which competes for tubular secretion, has been shown to increase the plasma half-life of dyphylline .
in one survey, 2.3% of patients taking labetalol hcl in combination with tricyclic antidepressants experienced tremor, as compared to 0.7% reported to occur with labetalol hcl alone.
cimetidine has been shown to increase the bioavailability of labetalol hcl.
synergism has been shown between halothane anesthesia and intravenously administered labetalol hcl.
during controlled hypotensive anesthesia using labetalol hcl in association with halothane, high concentrations (3% or above) of halothane should not be used because the degree of hypotension will be increased and because of the possibility of a large reduction in cardiac output and an increase in central venous pressure.
labetalol hcl blunts the reflex tachycardia produced by nitroglycerin without preventing its hypotensive effect.
if labetalol hcl is used with nitroglycerin in patients with angina pectoris, additional antihypertensive effects may occur.
care should be taken if labetalol is used concomitantly with calcium antagonists of the verapamil type.
labetalol hcl has also been reported to produce a false positive test for amphetamine when screening urine for the presence of drugs using the commercially available assay methods toxi-lab a  (thin-layer chromatographic assay) and emit-d.a.u.  (radioenzymatic assay).
when patients being treated with labetalol have a positive urine test for amphetamine using these techniques confirmation should be made by using more specific methods such as a gas chromatographic-mass spectrometer technique.
toxicologic and toxicokinetic studies in rats did not demonstrate any alterations in the clearance or toxicologic profile of either methotrexate or kineret when the two agents were administered together.
in a study in which patients with active ra were treated for up to 24 weeks with concurrent kineret and etanercept therapy, a 7% rate of serious infections was observed, which was higher than that observed with etanercept alone (0%).
two percent of patients treated concurrently with kineret and etanercept developed neutropenia (anc  1 x 109/l).
persons taking most antibiotics, methotrexate and pyrimethamine invalidate folic acid and vitamin b12 diagnostic blood assays.
colchicine para-aminosalicylic acid and heavy alcohol intake for longer than 2 weeks may produce malabsorption of vitamin b12.
metformin: in healthy subjects given single 500 mg doses of cephalexin and metformin, plasma metformin mean cmax and auc increased by an average of 34% and 24%, respectively, and metformin mean renal clearance decreased by 14%.
no information is available about the interaction of cephalexin and metformin following multiple doses of either drug.
although not observed in this study, adverse effects could potentially arise from co-administration of cephalexin and metformin by inhibition of tubular secretion via organic cationic transporter systems.
accordingly, careful patient monitoring and dose adjustment of metformin is recommended in patients concomitantly taking cephalexin and metformin.
probenecid: as with other b-lactams, the renal excretion of cephalexin is inhibited by probenecid.
geocillin (carbenicillin indanyl sodium) blood levels may be increased and prolonged by concurrent administration of probenecid.
calcium supplements/antacids
products containing calcium and other multivalent cations (such as aluminum, magnesium, iron) are likely to interfere with absorption of ibandronate.
ibandronate should be taken at least 60 minutes before any oral medications containing multivalent cations (including antacids, supplements or vitamins).
h2 blockers and proton pump inhibitors (ppis)
of over 3500 patients enrolled in the ibandronate osteoporosis treatment and prevention studies, 15% used anti-peptic agents (primarily h2 blockers and ppis).
among these patients, the incidence of upper gastrointestinal adverse experiences in the patients treated with ibandronate 150 mg once monthly was similar to that in patients treated with ibandronate 2.5 mg once daily.
aspirin/nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (nsaids)
in the large, placebo-controlled osteoporosis treatment study, aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs were taken by 62% of the 2946 patients.
among aspirin or nsaid users, the incidence of upper gastrointestinal adverse events in patients treated with ibandronate 2.5 mg daily (28.9%) was similar to that in placebo-treated patients (30.7%).
similarly, in the 1-year monthly comparison study, aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs were taken by 39% of the 1602 patients.
the incidence of upper gastrointestinal events in patients concomitantly taking aspirin or nsaids was similar in patients taking ibandronate 2.5 mg daily (21.7%) and 150 mg once monthly (22.0%).
however, since aspirin, nsaids, and bisphosphonates are all associated with gastrointestinal irritation, caution should be exercised in the concomitant use of aspirin or nsaids with ibandronate.
all vasopressors should be used cautiously in patients taking monoamine oxidase (mao) inhibitors.
epinephrine should not be administered concomitantly with other sympathomimetic drugs (such as isoproterenol) because of possible additive effects and increased toxicity.
administration of epinephrine to patients receiving cyclopropane or halogenated hydrocarbon general anesthetics such as halothane which sensitize the myocardium, may induce cardiac arrhythmia..
epinephrine also should be used cautiously with other drugs (e.g., digitalis, glycosides) that sensitize the myocardium to the actions of sympathomimetic drugs.
diuretic agents may decrease vascular response to pressor drugs such as epinephrine.
epinephrine may antagonize the neuron blockade produced by guanethidine resulting in decreased antihypertensive effect and requiring increased dosage of the latter.
in patients receiving nonselective monoamine oxidase inhibitors (maois) (e.g., selegiline hydrochloride) in combination with serotoninergic agents (e.g., fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine, sertraline, venlafaxine), there have been reports of serious, sometimes fatal, reactions.
because dexfenfluramine is a serotonin releaser and reuptake inhibitor, dexfenfluramine should not be used concomitantly with a mao inhibitor.
at least 14 days should elapse between discontinuation of a mao inhibitor and initiation of treatment with dexfenfluramine.
at least 3 weeks should elapse between discontinuation of dexfenfluramine and initiation of treatment with a mao inhibitor.
a rare, but serious, constellation of symptoms, termed serotonin syndrome, has been reported with the concomitant use of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (ssris) and agents for migraine therapy, such as imitrex (sumatriptan succinate) and dihydroergotamine.
dexfenfluramine should not be administered with other serotoninergic agents.
concurrent administration of etanercept (another tnf -blocking agent) and anakinra (an interleukin-1 antagonist) has been associated with an increased risk of serious infections, and increased risk of neutropenia and no additional benefit compared to these medicinal products alone.
other tnfa-blocking agents (including remicade) used in combination with anakinra may also result in similar toxicities.
in rheumatoid arthritis, concomitant medications besides mtx were nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents, folic acid, corticosteroids and/or narcotics.
concomitant crohn s disease medications were antibiotics, antivirals, corticosteroids, 6-mp/aza and aminosalicylates.
in psoriatic arthritis clinical trials, concomitant medications included mtx in approximately half of the patients as well as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents, folic acid and corticosteroids.
patients with crohn s disease who received immunosuppressants tended to experience fewer infusion reactions compared to patients on no immunosuppressants.
serum infliximab concentrations appeared to be unaffected by baseline use of medications for the treatment of crohn s disease including corticosteroids, antibiotics (metronidazole or ciprofloxacin) and aminosalicylates.
nitroglycerin: dynacirc  (isradipine) has been safely coadministered with nitroglycerin.
hydrochlorothiazide: a study in normal healthy volunteers has shown that concomitant administration of dynacirc  (isradipine) and hydrochlorothiazide does not result in altered pharmacoktnetics of either drug.
in a study in hypertensive patients, addition of isradipine to existing hydrochlorothiazide therapy did not result in any unexpected adverse effects, and isradipine had an additional antihypertensive effect.
propranolol: in a single dose study in normal volunteers, coadministration of propranolol had a small effect on the rate but no effect on the extent of isradipine bioavailability.
propranolol to healthy volunteers under steady-state conditions had no relevant effect on either drug s bioavailability, auc and cmax, differences were  20% between isradipine given singly and in combination with propranolol, and between propranolol given singly and in combination with isradipine.
cimetidine: in a study in healthy volunteers, a one-week course of cimetidine at 400 mg b.i.d. with a single 5 mg dose of isradipine on the sixth day showed an increase in isradipine mean peak plasma concentrations (36%) and significant increase in area under the curve (50%).
if isradipine therapy is initiated in a patient currently receiving cimetidine careful monitoring for adverse reactions is advised and downward dose adjustment may be required.
rifampicin: in a study in healthy volunteers, a six-day course of rifampicin at 600 mg/day followed by a single 5 mg dose of isradipine resulted in a reduction in isradipine levels to below detectable limits.
if rifampicin therapy is required, isradipine concentrations and therapeutic effects are likely to be markedly reduced or abolished as a consequence of increased metabolism and higher clearance of isradipine.
warfarin: in a study in healthy volunteers, no clinically relevant pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic interaction between isradipine and racemic warfarin was seen when two single oral doses of warfarin (0.7 mg/kg body weight) were administered during 11 days of multipledose treatment with 5 mg b.i.d. isradipine.
neither racemic warfarin nor isradipine binding to plasma proteins in vitro was altered by the addition of the other drug.
digoxin: the concomitant administration of dynacirc  (isradipine) and digoxin in a single-dose pharmacokinetic study did not affect renal, nonrenal and total body clearance of digoxin.
fentanyl anesthesia: severe hypotension has been reported during fentanyl anesthesia with concomitant use of a beta blocker and a calcium channel blocker.
even though such interactions have not been seen in clinical studies with dynacirc  (isradipine), an increased volume of circulating fluids might be required if such an interaction were to occur.
zebeta should not be combined with other beta-blocking agents.
patients receiving catecholamine-depleting drugs, such as reserpine or guanethidine, should be closely monitored, because the added beta-adrenergic blocking action of zebeta may produce excessive reduction of sympathetic activity.
in patients receiving concurrent therapy with clonidine, if therapy is to be discontinued, it is suggested that zebeta be discontinued for several days before the withdrawal of clonidine.
zebeta should be used with care when myocardial depressants or inhibitors of av conduction, such as certain calcium antagonists (particularly of the phenylalkylamine [verapamil] and benzothiazepine [diltiazem] classes), or antiarrhythmic agents, such as disopyramide, are used concurrently.
concurrent use of rifampin increases the metabolic clearance of zebeta, resulting in a shortened elimination half-life of zebeta.
pharmacokinetic studies document no clinically relevant interactions with other agents given concomitantly, including thiazide diuretics, digoxin, and cimetidine.
there was no effect of zebeta on prothrombin time in patients on stable doses of warfarin.
colchicine is inhibited by acidifying agents.
the action of colchicine is potentiated by alkalinizing agents.
colchicine may increase sensitivity to the cns depressants.
response to sympathomimetic agents may be enhanced by colchicine.
although clinical studies have not established a cause and effect relationship, physicians should be aware that variable effects an blood coagulation have been reported very rarely in patients receiving oral anticoagulants and chlordiazepoxide.
the concomitant use of alcohol or other central nervous system depressants may have an additive effect.
warfarin: meclofenamate sodium enhances the effect of warfarin.
therefore, when meclofenamate sodium is given to a patient receiving warfarin, the dosage of warfarin should be reduced to prevent excessive prolongation of the prothrombin time.
aspirin: concurrent administration of aspirin may lower meclofenamate sodium plasma levels, possibly by competing for protein-binding sites.
the urinary excretion of meclofenamate sodium is unaffected by aspirin, indicating no change in meclofenamate sodium absorption.
meclofenamate sodium does not affect serum salicylate levels.
propoxyphene: the concurrent administration of propoxyphene hydrochloride does not affect the bioavailability of meclofenamate sodium.
antacids: concomitant administration of aluminum and magnesium hydroxides does not interfere with absorption of meclofenamate sodium.
plasma levels of anticonvulsant agents may become subtherapeutic during cisplatin therapy.
non-selective mao inhibitors including tranylcypromine sulfate, phenelzine sulfate, and pargyline hc1: concomitant use of l-tyrosine and non-selective mao inhibitors may cause hypertension.
interactions may occur with the following: adrenocorticoids (cortisone-like medicine), anticoagulants (blood thinners), carbamazepine, corticotropin (barbiturates may decrease the effects of these medicines), central nervous system (cns) depressants (using these medicines with barbiturates may result in increased cns depressant effects), divalproex sodium, valproic acid (using these medicines with barbiturates may change the amount of either medicine that you need to take), and oral contraceptives containing estrogens (barbiturates may decrease the effectiveness of these oral contraceptives, and you may need to change to a different type of birth control).
the adverse effects of camptosar, such as myelosuppression and diarrhea, would be expected to be exacerbated by other antineoplastic agents having similar adverse effects.
lymphocytopenia has been reported in patients receiving camptosar, and it is possible that the administration of dexamethasone as antiemetic prophylaxis may have enhanced the likelihood of this effect.
the incidence of akathisia in clinical trials of the weekly dosage schedule was greater (8.5%, 4/47 patients) when prochlorperazine was administered on the same day as camptosar than when these drugs were given on separate days (1.3%, 1/80 patients).
it would be expected that laxative use during therapy with camptosar would worsen the incidence or severity of diarrhea, but this has not been studied.
in view of the potential risk of dehydration secondary to vomiting and/or diarrhea induced by camptosar, the physician may wish to withhold diuretics during dosing with camptosar and, certainly, during periods of active vomiting or diarrhea.
uricosuric agents: aspirin may decrease the effects of probenecid, sulfinpyrazone, and phenylbutazone.
alcohol: has a synergistic effect with aspirin in causing gastrointestinal bleeding.
corticosteroids: concomitant administration with aspirin may increase the risk of gastrointestinal ulceration and may reduce serum salicylate levels.
pyrazolone derivatives (phenylbutazone, oxyphenbutazone, and possibly dipyrone): concomitant administration with aspirin may increase the risk of gastrointestinal ulceration.
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents: aspirin is contraindicated in patients who are hypersensitive to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents.
urinary alkalinizers: decrease aspirin effectiveness by increasing the rate of salicylate renal excretion.
phenobarbital: decreases aspirin effectiveness by enzyme induction.
phenytoin: serum phenytoin levels may be increased by aspirin.
propranolol: may decrease aspirins anti-inflammatory action by competing for the same receptors.
antacids: enteric coated aspirin should not be given concurrently with antacids, since an increase in the ph of the stomach may effect the enteric coating of the tablets.
when administered concurrently, the following drugs may interact with amphotericin b: antineoplastic agents: may enhance the potential for renal toxicity, bronchospasm and hypotension.
antineoplastic agents (e. g., nitrogen mustard, etc.) should be given concomitantly only with great caution.
corticosteroids and corticotropin (acth): may potentiate amphotericin b- induced hypokalemia which may predispose the patient to cardiac dysfunction.
digitalis glycosides: amphotericin b-induced hypokalemia may potentiate digitalis toxicity.
flucytosine: while a synergistic relationship with amphotericin b has been reported, concomitant use may increase the toxicity of flucytosine by possibly increasing its cellular uptake and/or impairing its renal excretion.
imidazoles (e. g., ketoconazole, miconazole, clotrimazole, fluconazole, etc.): in vitro and animal studies with the combination of amphotericin b and imidazoles suggest that imidazoles may induce fungal resistance to amphotericin b.
other nephrotoxic medications: agents such as aminoglycosides, cyclosporine, and pentamidine may enhance the potential for drug-induced renal toxicity, and should be used concomitantly only with great caution.
skeletal muscle relaxants: amphotericin b-induced hypokalemia may enhance the curariform effect of skeletal muscle relaxants (e.g., tubocurarine).
leukocyte transfusions: acute pulmonary toxicity has been reported in patients receiving intravenous amphotericin b and leukocyte transfusions.
therefore, linezolid has the potential for interaction with adrenergic and serotonergic agents.
adrenergic agents:some individuals receiving zyvox may experience a reversible enhancement of the pressor response to indirect-acting sympathomimetic agents, vasopressor or dopaminergic agents.
commonly used drugs such as phenylpropanolamine and pseudoephedrine have been specifically studied.
initial doses of adrenergic agents, such as dopamine or epinephrine, should be reduced and titrated to achieve the desired response.
serotonergic agents: co-administration of linezolid and serotonergic agents was not associated with serotonin syndrome in phase 1, 2 or 3 studies.
spontaneous reports of serotonin syndrome associated with co-administration of zyvox and serotonergic agents, including antidepressants such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (ssris), have been reported.
patients who are treated with zyvox and concomitant serotonergic agents should be closely observed for signs and symptoms of serotonin syndrome (e.g., cognitive dysfunction, hyperpyrexia, hyperreflexia, incoordination).
if any signs or symptoms occur physicians should consider discontinuation of either one or both agents (zyvox or concomitant serotonergic agents).
when amiloride hcl is administered concomitantly with an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, the risk of hyperkalemia may be increased.
lithium generally should not be given with diuretics because they reduce its renal clearance and add a high risk of lithium toxicity.
in some patients, the administration of a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agent can reduce the diuretic, natriuretic, and antihypertensive effects of loop, potassium-sparing and thiazide diuretics.
therefore, when midamor and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents are used concomitantly, the patient should be observed closely to determine if the desired effect of the diuretic is obtained.
since indomethacin and potassium-sparing diuretics, including midamor, may each be associated with increased serum potassium levels, the potential effects on potassium kinetics and renal function should be considered when these agents are administered concurrently.
amantadine, tricyclic antidepressants, and maois may increase anticholinergic effect of clidinium.
clidinium may decrease the effect of phenothiazines, levodopa, and ketoconazole.
a similar association, though less marked, has been suggested with barbiturates, phenyl-butazone, phenytoin sodium, carbamazepine and possibly with griseofulvin, ampicillin, and tetracyclines (72)
because alosetron is metabolized by a variety of hepatic cyp drug-metabolizing enzymes, inducers or inhibitors of these enzymes may change the clearance of alosetron.
in a pharmacokinetic study, 40 healthy female subjects received fluvoxamine in escalating doses from 50 to 200 mg per day for 16 days, with coadministration of alosetron 1 mg on the last day.
fluvoxamine increased mean alosetron plasma concentrations (auc) approximately 6-fold and prolonged the half-life by approximately 3-fold.
concomitant administration of alosetron and fluvoxamine is contraindicated.
concomitant administration of alosetron and moderate cyp1a2 inhibitors, including quinolone antibiotics and cimetidine, has not been evaluated, but should be avoided unless clinically necessary because of similar potential drug interactions.
in a pharmacokinetic study, 38 healthy female subjects received ketoconazole 200 mg twice daily for 7 days, with coadministration of alosetron 1 mg on the last day.
ketoconazole increased mean alosetron plasma concentrations (auc) by 29%.
caution should be used when alosetron and ketoconazole are administered concomitantly.
coadministration of alosetron and strong cyp3a4 inhibitors, such as clarithromycin, telithromycin, protease inhibitors, voriconazole, and itraconazole has not been evaluated but should be undertaken with caution because of similar potential drug interactions.
although not studied with alosetron, inhibition of n-acetyltransferase may have clinically relevant consequences for drugs such as isoniazid, procainamide, and hydralazine.
another study showed that alosetron had no clinically significant effect on plasma concentrations of the oral contraceptive agents ethinyl estradiol and levonorgestrel (cyp3a4 substrates).
a clinical interaction study was also conducted with alosetron and the cyp3a4 substrate cisapride.
interactions may occur between epa supplements and aspirin and other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and herbs such as garlic (allium sativum) and ginkgo (ginkgo biloba).
increased nephrotoxicity has been reported following concomitant administration of cephalosporins and aminoglycoside antibiotics.
drug/laboratory test interactions as with cephalothin, high concentrations of cefoxitin ( 100 micrograms/ml) may interfere with measurement of serum and urine creatinine levels by the jaff  reaction, and produce false increases of modest degree in the levels of creatinine reported.
these agents include medications such as: anticoagulants, platelet inhibitors including acetylsalicylic acid, sali-cylates, nsaids (including ketorolac tromethamine), dipyridamole, or sulfinpyrazone.
potassium-depleting diuretics are a major contributing factor to digitalis toxicity.
quinidine, verapamil, amiodarone, propafenone, indomethacin, itraconazole, alprazolam, and spironolactone raise the serum digoxin concentration due to a reduction in clearance and/or in volume of distribution of the drug, with the implication that digitalis intoxication may result.
erythromycin and clarithromycin (and possibly other macrolide antibiotics) and tetracycline may increase digoxin absorption in patients who inactivate digoxin by bacterial metabolism in the lower intestine, so that digitalis intoxication may result.
propantheline and diphenoxylate, by decreasing gut motility, may increase digoxin absorption.
antacids, kaolin-pectin, sulfasalazine, neomycin, cholestyramine, certain anticancer drugs, and metoclopramide may interfere with intestinal digoxin absorption, resulting in unexpectedly low serum concentrations.
rifampin may decrease serum digoxin concentration, especially in patients with renal dysfunction, by increasing the non-renal clearance of digoxin.
there have been inconsistent reports regarding the effects of other drugs (e.g., quinine, penicillamine) on serum digoxin concentration.
thyroid administration to a digitalized, hypothyroid patient may increase the dose requirement of digoxin.
concomitant use of digoxin and sympathomimetics increases the risk of cardiac arrhythmias.
although beta-adrenergic blockers or calcium channel blockers and digoxin may be useful in combination to control atrial fibrillation, their additive effects on av node conduction can result in advanced or complete heart block.
furthermore, caution should be exercised when combining digoxin with any drug that may cause a significant deterioration in renal function, since a decline in glomerular filtration or tubular secretion may impair the excretion of digoxin.
opioids are strong central nervous system depressants, but regular users develop physiological tolerance allowing gradually increased dosages.
in combination with other central nervous system depressants, heroin may still kill even experienced users, particularly if their tolerance to the drug has reduced or the strength of their usual dose has increased.
toxicology studies of heroin-related deaths reveal frequent involvement of other central nervous system depressants, including alcohol, benzodiazepines such as diazepam (valium), and, to a rising degree, methadone.
ironically, benzodiazepines are often used in the treatment of heroin addiction while they cause much more severe withdrawal symptoms.
cocaine sometimes proves to be fatal when used in combination with heroin.
oral doses of antizol (10-20 mg/kg), via alcohol dehydrogenase inhibition, significantly reduced the rate of elimination of ethanol (by approximately 40%) given to healthy volunteers in moderate doses.
similarly, ethanol decreased the rate of elimination of antizol (by approximately 50%) by the same mechanism.
reciprocal interactions may occur with concomitant use of antizol and drugs that increase or inhibit the cytochrome p450 system (e.g., phenytoin, carbamazepine, cimetidine, ketoconazole), though this has not been studied
carbamazepine: elevated carbamazepine levels have been reported in postmarketing experience when suprax is administered concomitantly.
warfarin and anticoagulants: increased prothrombin time, with or without clinical bleeding, has been reported when cefixime is administered concomitantly.
drug/laboratory test interactions a false-positive reaction for ketones in the urine may occur with tests using nitroprusside but not with those using nitroferricyanide.
laboratory tests response to plenaxis should be monitored by measuring serum total testosterone concentrations just prior to administration on day 29 and every 8 weeks thereafter.
in vitro studies have shown that the metabolism of docetaxel may be modified by the concomitant administration of compounds that induce, inhibit, or are metabolized by cytochrome p450 3a4, such as cyclosporine, terfenadine, ketoconazole, erythromycin, and troleandomycin.
in evaluating the potential for interactions among co-administered antiepilepsy drugs (aeds), whether or not an aed induces or does not induce metabolic enzymes is an important consideration.
phenytoin, phenobarbital and carbamazepine are ge nerally classified as enzyme inducers;
valproate and gabapentin are not.
gabitril is considered to be a non-enzyme inducing aed.
effects of gabitril on other antiepilepsy drugs (aeds) : phenytoin: tiagabine had no effect on the steady-state plasma concentrations of phenytoin in patients with epilepsy.
carbamazepine: tiagabine had no effect on the steady-state plasma concentrations of carbamazepine or its epoxide metabolite in patients with epilepsy.
valproate: tiagabine causes a slight decrease (about 10%) in steady-state valproate concentrations.
phenobarbital or primidone : no formal pharmacokinetic studies have been performed examining the addition of tiagabine to regimens containing phenobarbital or primidone.
the addition of tiagabine in a limited number of patients in three well-controlled studies caused no systematic changes in phenobarbital or primidone concentrations when compared to placebo.
effects of other antiepilepsy drugs (aeds) on gabitril : carbamazepine: population pharmacokinetic analyses indicate that tiagabine clearance is 60% greater in patients taking carbamazepine with or without other enzyme- inducing aeds.
phenytoin: population pharmacokinetic analyses indicate that tiagabine clearance is 60% greater in patients taking phenytoin with or without other enzyme- inducing aeds.
phenobarbital (primidone): population pharmacokinetic analyses indicate that tiagabine clearance is 60% greater in patients taking phenobarbital (primidone) with or without other enzyme-inducing aeds.
valproate: the addition of tiagabine to patients taking valproate chronically had no effect on tiagabine pharmacokinetics, but valproate significantly decreased tiagabine binding in vitro from 96.3 to 94.8%, which resulted in an increase of approximately 40% in the free tiagabine concentration.
interaction of gabitril with other drugs : cimetidine : co-administration of cimetidine (800 mg/day) to patients taking tiagabine chronically had no effect on tiagabine pharmacokinetics.
theophylline: a single 10 mg dose of tiagabine did not affect the pharmacokinetics of theophylline at steady state.
warfarin: no significant differences were observed in the steady-state pharmacokinetics of r-warfarin or s-warfarin with the addition of tiagabine given as a single dose.
digoxin: concomitant administration of tiagabine did not affect the steady-state pharmacokinetics of digoxin or the mean daily trough serum level of digoxin.
ethanol or triazolam: no significant differences were observed in the pharmacokinetics of triazolam (0.125 mg) and tiagabine (10 mg) when given together as a single dose.
the pharmacokinetics of ethanol were not affected by multiple-dose administration of tiagabine.
tiagabine has shown no clinically important potentiation of the pharmacodynamic effects of triazo lam or alcohol.
because of the possible additive effects of drugs that may depress the nervous system, ethanol or triazolam should be used cautiously in combination with tiagabine.
oral contraceptives: multiple dose administration of tiagabine (8 mg/day monotherapy) did not alter the pharmacokinetics of oral contraceptives in healthy women of childbearing age.
antipyrine : antipyrine pharmacokinetics were not significantly different before and after tiagabine multiple-dose regimens.
this indicates that tiagabine does not cause induction or inhibition of the hepatic microsomal enzyme systems responsible for the metabolism of antipyrine.
interaction of gabitril with highly protein bound drugs: in vitro data showed that tiagabine is 96% bound to human plasma protein and therefore has the potential to interact with other highly protein bound compounds.
chlorthalidone may add to or potentiate the action of other antihypertensive drugs.
chlorthalidone and related drugs may increase the responsiveness to tubocurarine.
chlorthalidone and related drugs may decrease arterial responsiveness to norepinephrine.
poor metabolizers have higher than expected plasma concentrations of tricyclic antidepressants (tcas) when given usual doses.
cimetidine) and many that are substrates for p450 2d6 (many other antidepressants, phenothiazines, and the type 1c antiarrhythmics propafenone and flecainide).
while all the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (ssris), e.g., fluoxetine, sertraline, and paroxetine, inhibit p450 2d6, they may vary in the extent of inhibition.
the extent to which ssri-tca interactions may pose clinical problems will depend on the degree of inhibition and the pharmacokinetics of the ssri involved.
nevertheless, caution is indicated in the coadministration of tcas with any of the ssris and also in switching from one class to the other.
concomitant use of tricyclic antidepressants with drugs that can inhibit cytochrome p450 2d6 may require lower doses than usually prescribed for either the tricyclic antidepressant or the other drug.
it is desirable to monitor tca plasma levels whenever a tca is going to be coadministered with another drug known to be an inhibitor of p450 2d6.
monoamine oxidase inhibitors: guanethidine or similarly acting compounds;
alcohol, barbiturates and other cns depressants;
and disulfiram when amitriptyline hcl is given with anticholinergic agents or sympathomimetic drugs, including epinephrine combined with local anesthetics, close supervision and careful adjustment of dosages are required.
hyperpyrexia has been reported when amitriptyline hcl is administered with anticholinergic agents or with neuroleptic drugs, particularly during hot weather.
paralytic ileus may occur in patients taking tricyclic antidepressants in combination with anticholinergic-type drugs.
cimetidine is reported to reduce hepatic metabolism of certain tricyclic antidepressants, thereby delaying elimination and increasing steady-state concentrations of these drugs.
clinically significant effects have been reported with the tricyclic antidepressants when used concomitantly with cimetidine.
increases in plasma levels of tricyclic antidepressants, and in the frequency and severity of side effects, particularly anticholinergic, have been reported when cimetidine was added to the drug regimen.
discontinuation of cimetidine in well-controlled patients receiving tricyclic antidepressants and cimetidine may decrease the plasma levels and efficacy of the antidepressants.
transient delirium has been reported in patients who were treated with one gram of ethchlorvynol and 75 - 150 mg of amitriptyline hcl.
prolonged recovery time may occur if barbiturates and/or narcotics are used concurrently with ketamine.
ketamine is clinically compatible with the commonly used general and local anesthetic agents when an adequate respiratory exchange is maintained.
in normal volunteers receiving indomethacin, the administration of diflunisal decreased the renal clearance and significantly increased the plasma levels of indomethacin.
in some patients, combined use of indocin and diflunisal has been associated with fatal gastrointestinal hemorrhage.
therefore, diflunisal and indocin should not be used concomitantly.
in a study in normal volunteers, it was found that chronic concurrent administration of 3.6 g of aspirin per day decreases indomethacin blood levels approximately 20%.
the concomitant use of indocin with other nsaids is not recommended due to the increased possibility of gastrointestinal toxicity, with little or no increase in efficacy.
clinical studies have shown that indocin does not influence the hypoprothrombinemia produced by anticoagulants.
however, when any additional drug, including indocin, is added to the treatment of patients on anticoagulant therapy, the patients should be observed for alterations of the prothrombin time.
in post-marketing experience, bleeding has been reported in patients on concomitant treatment with anticoagulants and indocin.
caution should be exercised when indocin and anticoagulants are administered concomitantly.
when indocin is given to patients receiving probenecid, the plasma levels of indomethacin are likely to be increased.
caution should be used if indocin is administered simultaneously with methotrexate.
indocin has been reported to decrease the tubular secretion of methotrexate and to potentiate its toxicity.
administration of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs concomitantly with cyclosporine has been associated with an increase in cyclosporine-induced toxicity, possibly due to decreased synthesis of renal prostacyclin.
nsaids should be used with caution in patients taking cyclosporine, and renal function should be carefully monitored.
capsules indocin 50 mg t.i.d. produced a clinically relevant elevation of plasma lithium and reduction in renal lithium clearance in psychiatric patients and normal subjects with steady state plasma lithium concentrations.
as a consequence, when indocin and lithium are given concomitantly, the patient should be carefully observed for signs of lithium toxicity.
indocin given concomitantly with digoxin has been reported to increase the serum concentration and prolong the half-life of digoxin.
therefore, when indocin and digoxin are used concomitantly, serum digoxin levels should be closely monitored.
in some patients, the administration of indocin can reduce the diuretic, natriuretic, and antihypertensive effects of loop, potassium-sparing, and thiazide diuretics.
therefore, when indocin and indocin.
(indomethacin) diuretics are used concomitantly, the patient should be observed closely to determine if the desired effect of the diuretic is obtained.
indocin reduces basal plasma renin activity (pra), as well as those elevations of pra induced by furosemide administration, or salt or volume depletion.
it has been reported that the addition of triamterene to a maintenance schedule of indocin resulted in reversible acute renal failure in two of four healthy volunteers.
indocin and triamterene should not be administered together.
indocin and potassium-sparing diuretics each may be associated with increased serum potassium levels.
the potential effects of indocin and potassium-sparing diuretics on potassium kinetics and renal function should be considered when these agents are administered concurrently.
most of the above effects concerning diuretics have been attributed, at least in part, to mechanisms involving inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis by indocin.
blunting of the antihypertensive effect of beta-adrenoceptor blocking agents by non-steroidal antiinflammatory drugs including indocin has been reported.
indocin can reduce the antihypertensive effects of captopril and losartan.
the following are examples of substances that may increase the blood-glucose-lowering effect and susceptibility to hypoglycemia: oral antidiabetes products, ace inhibitors, disopyramide, fibrates, fluoxetine, mao inhibitors, propoxyphene, salicylates, somatostatin analog (e.g., octreotide), sulfonamide antibiotics.
the following are examples of substances that may reduce the blood-glucose-lowering effect of insulin: corticosteroids, danazol, diuretics, sympathomimetic agents (e.g., epinephrine, albuterol, terbutaline), isoniazid, phenothiazine derivatives, somatropin, thyroid hormones, estrogens, progestogens (e.g., in oral contraceptives).
beta-blockers, clonidine, lithium salts, and alcohol may either potentiate or weaken the blood-glucose-lowering effect of insulin.
in addition, under the influence of sympatholytic medicinal products such as beta-blockers, clonidine, guanethidine, and reserpine, the signs of hypoglycemia may be reduced or absent.
in clinical studies, tilade has been co-administered with other anti-asthma medications, including inhaled and oral bronchodilators, and inhaled corticosteroids, with no evidence of increased frequency of adverse events or laboratory abnormalities.
concurrent administration of oxyphenbutazone and androgens may result in elevated serum levels of oxyphenbutazone.
in diabetic patients, the metabolic effects of androgens may decrease blood glucose and therefore, insulin requirements.
aminoglutethimide: aminoglutethimide may diminish adrenal suppression by corticosteroids.
amphotericin b injection and potassium-depleting agents: when corticosteroids are administered concomitantly with potassium-depleting agents (e.g., amphotericin b, diuretics), patients should be observed closely for development of hypokalemia.
in addition, there have been cases reported in which concomitant use of amphotericin b and hydrocortisone was followed by cardiac enlargement and congestive heart failure.
antibiotics: macrolide antibiotics have been reported to cause a significant decrease in corticosteroid clearance.
anticholinesterases: concomitant use of anticholinesterase agents and corticosteroids may produce severe weakness in patients with myasthenia gravis.
if possible, anticholinesterase agents should be withdrawn at least 24 hours before initiating corticosteroid therapy.
anticoagulants, oral: co-administration of corticosteroids and warfarin usually results in inhibition of response to warfarin, although there have been some conflicting reports.
antidiabetics: because corticosteroids may increase blood glucose concentrations, dosage adjustments of antidiabetic agents may be required.
cholestyramine: cholestyramine may increase the clearance of corticosteroids.
cyclosporine: increased activity of both cyclosporine and corticosteroids may occur when the two are used concurrently.
digitalis glycosides: patients on digitalis glycosides may be at increased risk of arrhythmias due to hypokalemia.
ephedrine: ephedrine may enhance the metabolic clearance of corticosteroids, resulting in decreased blood levels and lessened physiologic activity, thus requiring an increase in corticosteroid dosage.
estrogens, including oral contraceptives: estrogens may decrease the hepatic metabolism of certain corticosteroids, thereby increasing their effect.
hepatic enzyme inducers, inhibitors and substrates: drugs which induce cytochrome p450 3a4 (cyp 3a4) enzyme activity (e.g., barbiturates, phenytoin, carbamazepine, rifampin) may enhance the metabolism of corticosteroids and require that the dosage of the corticosteroid be increased.
drugs which inhibit cyp 3a4 (e.g., ketoconazole, macrolide antibiotics such as erythromycin) have the potential to result in increased plasma concentrations of corticosteroids.
co-administration with other drugs that are metabolized by cyp 3a4 (e.g., indinavir, erythromycin) may increase their clearance, resulting in decreased plasma concentration.
ketoconazole: ketoconazole has been reported to decrease the metabolism of certain corticosteroids by up to 60%, leading to increased risk of corticosteroid side effects.
in addition, ketoconazole alone can inhibit adrenal corticosteroid synthesis and may cause adrenal insufficiency during corticosteroid withdrawal.
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents (nsaids): concomitant use of aspirin (or other nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents) and corticosteroids increases the risk of gastrointestinal side effects.
aspirin should be used cautiously in conjunction with corticosteroids in hypoprothrombinemia.
the clearance of salicylates may be increased with concurrent use of corticosteroids.
phenytoin: in post-marketing experience, there have been reports of both increases and decreases in phenytoin levels with dexamethasone co-administration, leading to alterations in seizure control.
thalidomide: co-administration with thalidomide should be employed cautiously, as toxic epidermal necrolysis has been reported with concomitant use.
vaccines: patients on corticosteroid therapy may exhibit a diminished response to toxoids and live or inactivated vaccines due to inhibition of antibody response.
corticosteroids may also potentiate the replication of some organisms contained in live attenuated vaccines.
routine administration of vaccines or toxoids should be deferred until corticosteroid therapy is discontinued if possible.
the physician should be alert for possible combined drug actions, desirable or undesirable, involving ifosfamide even though ifosfamide has been used successfully concurrently with other drugs, including other cytotoxic drugs.
drug interaction during pregnancy: cromolyn sodium and isoproterenol were studied following subcutaneous injections in pregnant mice.
the addition of 540 mg/kg/day of cromolyn sodium (approximately 340 times the maximum recommended daily inhalation dose in adults on a mg/m2 basis) to 2.7 mg/kg/day of isoproterenol (approximately 7 times the maximum recommended daily inhalation dose in adults on a mg/m2 basis) appears to have increased the incidence of both resorptions and malformations.
no drug interaction studies have been conducted for colazal, however the use of orally administered antibiotics could, theoretically, interfere with the release of mesalamine in the colon.
effect of sensipar on other drugs: drugs metabolized by cytochrome p450 2d6 (cyp2d6): sensipar  is a strong in vitro inhibitor of cyp2d6.
therefore, dose adjustments of concomitant medications that are predominantly metabolized by cyp2d6 and have a narrow therapeutic index (e.g., flecainide, vinblastine, thioridazine and most tricyclic antidepressants) may be required.
amitriptyline: concurrent administration of 25 mg or 100 mg cinacalcet with 50 mg amitriptyline increased amitriptyline exposure and nortriptyline (active metabolite) exposure by approximately 20% in cyp2d6 extensive metabolizers.
effect of other drugs on sensipar : sensipar  is metabolized by multiple cytochrome p450 enzymes, primarily cyp3a4, cyp2d6, and cyp1a2.
ketoconazole: sensipar is metabolized in part by cyp3a4.
co-administration of ketoconazole, a strong inhibitor of cyp3a4, increased cinacalcet exposure following a single 90 mg dose of sensipar by 2.3 fold.
dose adjustment of sensipar may be required and pth and serum calcium concentrations should be closely monitored if a patient initiates or discontinues therapy with a strong cyp3a4 inhibitor (e.g., ketoconazole, erythromycin, itraconazole;
in vitro studies demonstrated that the plasma protein binding of des-ciclesonide was not affected by warfarin or salicylic acid, indicating no potential for protein binding-based drug interactions.
in a drug interaction study, co-administration of orally inhaled ciclesonide and oral erythromycin, an inhibitor of cytochrome p450 3a4, had no effect on the pharmacokinetics of either des-ciclesonide or erythromycin.
in another drug interaction study, co-administration of orally inhaled ciclesonide and oral ketoconazole, a potent inhibitor of cytochrome p450 3a4, increased the exposure (auc) of des-ciclesonide by approximately 3.6-fold at steady state, while levels of ciclesonide remained unchanged.
therefore, ketoconazole should be administered with caution with intranasal ciclesonide.
dicumarol and warfarin may decrease hypoprothrombinemic effect.
other depressasnts such as alcohol, barbiturates, and maois may enhance cns depression when administered with ethchlorvynol.
metoclopramide: when coadministered with monurol, metoclopramide, a drug which increases gastrointestinal motility, lowers the serum concentration and urinary excretion of fosfomycin.
cimetidine: cimetidine does not affect the pharmacokinetics of fosfomycin when coadministered with monurol.
the effects of dcg-iv and l-ccg-1 upon phencyclidine (pcp)-induced locomotion and behavioral changes in mice.

injection of phencyclidine (pcp) were observed by measuring locomotor activity and stereotyped behavior. 
then, the effects of metabotropic glutamate receptor (mglur) agonists, dcg-iv and l-ccg-1, on the above behavioral changes induced by pcp were found. 
the effects of dcg-iv were very strong and completely depressed the pcp-induced hyperlocomotion. 
in order to examine some molecular mechanisms of pcp-induced behavioral changes, northern blot analysis of total rna from prefrontal cortical tissues of mice treated with pcp, dcg-iv, and l-ccg-1 was carried out.
the behavioral effects of the stereoisomers of n-allylnormetazocine (nanm) were compared with those of phencyclidine (pcp) in pigeons and squirrel monkeys responding under a multiple fixed-interval fixed-ratio (fi fr) schedule of food presentation. 
intermediate doses of (+)-nanm or pcp produced transient increases in fi responding in monkeys and sustained increases in fi responding in pigeons; 
in monkeys, (-)-nanm was about 10 times more potent than (+)-nanm in decreasing responding, whereas in pigeons (-)-nanm was about equipotent with (+)-nanm. 
in both species, (-)-nanm, but not (+)-nanm, antagonized the rate-decreasing effects of morphine on fi and fr responding. 
in monkeys, the effects of (-)-nanm, but not (+)-nanm or pcp, were antagonized by naloxone; 
the doses of naloxone required to antagonize the effects of (-)-nanm were more than 100 times higher than those required to antagonize the effects of morphine. 
in pigeons, naloxone did not systematically alter the effects of (-)-nanm, (+)-nanm or pcp. 
haloperidol reduced or eliminated the increases in fi responding produced by intermediate doses of either (+)-nanm or pcp in pigeons, but did not antagonize the decreases in fi or fr responding produced by high doses of pcp or either stereoisomer of nanm. 
suppression by verapamil of bombesin-enhanced peritoneal metastasis of intestinal adenocarcinomas induced by azoxymethane in wistar rats.

background: the effects of combined administration of bombesin and verapamil hydrochloride (verapamil), a calcium channel blocker, on the incidence of peritoneal metastasis of intestinal adenocarcinomas induced by azoxymethane (aom) and the labeling index of intestinal cancers were investigated in male wistar rats. 
methods: from the beginning of the experiment, rats were given 10 weekly subcutaneous injections of aom (7.4 mg/kg body weight) and subcutaneous injections of bombesin (40 microg/kg body weight) every other day, and from week 16, intraperitoneal injections of verapamil (10 or 20 mg/kg body weight) every other day until the end fo the experiment in week 45. 
although verapamil administered at either dose had little or no effect on the enhancement of intestinal carcinogenesis by bombesin or on the location, histologic type, depth of involvement, labeling index, apoptotic index or tumor vascularity of intestinal cancers, it significantly decreased the incidence of cancer metastasis. 
verapamil also significantly decreased the incidence of lymphatic invasion of adenocarcinomas, which was enhanced by bombesin. 
acid-catalyzed ethanolysis of temazepam in anhydrous and aqueous ethanol solutions.
the benzodiazepines are a family of anxiolytic and hypnotic drugs. 
in addition to this pharmacological interaction, this report describes a novel chemical reaction between temazepam (a benzodiazepine) and ethanol under acidic conditions similar to those found in vivo, resulting in a 3-ethoxylated product. 
the results raise the possibility that the ethanolysis reaction may occur in the stomach of people who consume alcohol and 3-hydroxy-1,4-benzodiazepine on a regular basis. 
induction of apoptosis in breast cancer cells in response to vitamin d and antiestrogens.

1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol d3 (1,25(oh)2d3), the active metabolite of vitamin d, is a potent inhibitor of breast cancer cell growth both in vivo and in vitro. 
in the experiments reported here, we examined the interactions between 1,25(oh)2d3 and the antiestrogen 4-hydroxytamoxifen (tam), which also induces apoptosis in mcf-7 cells. 
our data suggest that tam significantly potentiates the reduction in cell number induced by 1,25(oh)2d3 alone. 
combined treatment with 1,25(oh)2d3 and tam enhances the degree of apoptosis assessed using morphological markers that identify chromatin and nuclear matrix protein condensation. 
these data emphasize that apoptosis can be induced in mcf-7 cells either by activation of vitamin-d-mediated signalling or disruption of estrogen-dependent signalling.
green tea polyphenols as potent enhancers of glucocorticoid-induced mouse mammary tumor virus gene expression.

n-dodecyl gallate showed the most potent inhibition (66% inhibition at 10 microm), which was far more potent than that of crude tannic acid. 
interaction of clindamycin and gentamicin in vitro.

the minimal inhibitory concentrations of clindamycin and gentamicin alone and in combinations were determined by a microdilution method for 163 aerobic, facultative, and anaerobic clinical isolates. 
gentamicin did not interfere with the activity of clindamycin within the range of concentrations tested (0.1 to 100 mug/ml); 
combinations of clindamycin and gentamicin were indifferent for 29 strains and synergistic for 33 strains. 
all 20 strains of enterococcus, three strains of clostridium, three strains of escherichia coli, and one strain of proteus rettgeri were resistant to both clindamycin (minimal inhibitory concentration greater than 3.1 mug/ml) and gentamicin (minimal inhibitory concentration greater than 6.2 mug/ml). 
combinations of clindamycin and gentamicin were indifferent for 16 and synergistic for 11 of the resistant strains. 
differential regulation of tyrosine phosphorylation in tumor cells by contortrostatin, a homodimeric disintegrin, and monomeric disintegrins echistatin and flavoridin.
the homodimeric disintegrin contortrostatin was compared directly to the monomeric disintegrins echistatin and flavoridin for the ability to affect protein tyrosine phosphorylation in tumor cells. 
echistatin alone had no effect on tyrosine phosphorylation in t24 cells, but dose-dependently inhibits the effects of contortrostatin when both are added simultaneously. 
flavoridin alone was found to have no effect on cas, but can completely block contortrostatin-induced phosphorylation of this protein in mda-mb-435 cells. 
the fluoroquinolones are a rapidly growing class of antibiotics with a broad spectrum of activity against gram-negative and some gram-positive aerobic bacteria. 
these agents, including norfloxacin, ciprofloxacin, ofloxacin, enoxacin, and lomefloxacin, have been extensively studied and have demonstrated efficacy and safety profiles comparable to those of other traditional agents for the treatment of complicated or uncomplicated urinary tract infections and prostatitis. 
advantages offered by this class of antibiotics include optimal pharmacokinetics, effectiveness against multidrug-resistant organisms, and oral administration even when parenteral antibiotics are generally used. 
the serum concentration of phenytoin increased dramatically from 16.6 to 49.1 microg/ml when fluvoxamine was coadministered, although the daily dosage of phenytoin and other drugs had not changed. 
during phenytoin and fluvoxamine treatment, ataxia, a typical side effect of phenytoin, was observed. 
the genotypes of cyp2c9 and 2c19, the enzymes responsible for phenytoin metabolism, were homozygous for the wild-type alleles (cyp2c9*1/*1 and 2c19*1/ *1). 
the interaction may be a result of inhibition of both cyp2c9 and 2c19 by fluvoxamine.
two different types of therapy with magnesium are used: physiological oral magnesium supplementation which is totally atoxic since it palliates magnesium deficiencies by simply normalizing the magnesium intake and pharmacological magnesium therapy which may induce toxicity since it creates iatrogenic magnesium overload. 
primary and secondary magnesium deficiencies constitute the sole indication of physiological oral magnesium therapy. 
it is therefore necessary to be well acquainted with the clinical and paraclinical pattern of magnesium deficit and to discriminate between magnesium deficiency due to an insufficient magnesium intake which only requires oral physiological supplementation and magnesium depletion related to a dysregulation of the control mechanisms of magnesium status which requires more or less specific regulation of its causal dysregulation. 
physiological oral magnesium load constitutes the best tool for diagnosis of magnesium deficiency and the first step of its treatment. 
physiological oral magnesium supplementation (5 mg/kg/day) is easy and can be carried out in the diet or with magnesium salts, with practically only one contra-indication: overt renal failure. 
specific and aspecific treatments of magnesium depletion are tricky using for example magnesium sparing diuretics, pharmacological doses of vitamin b6, physiological doses of vitamin d and of selenium. 
there are 3 types of indications: specific (for the treatment of some forms of magnesium deficit i.e. acute), pharmacological (i.e. without alterations of magnesium status) and mixed--pharmacological and aetiopathogenic--(for example complications of chronic alcoholism). 
lastly local use of the mucocutaneous and cytoprotective properties of magnesium is still valid, in cardioplegic solutions and for preservation of transplants particularly.
effect of rofecoxib on the pharmacokinetics of digoxin in healthy volunteers.

the authors examined the effect of the cyclooxygenase-2 (cox-2) inhibitor, rofecoxib, at steady state on the pharmacokinetics of digoxin following a single dose in healthy subjects. 
samples for plasma and urine immunoreactive digoxin concentrations were collected through 120 hours following the digoxin dose. 
for digoxin auc(0-infinity), auc(0-24), and cmax, the geometric mean ratios (90% confidence interval) for (rofecoxib + digoxin/placebo + digoxin) were 1.04 (0.94, 1.14), 1.02 (0.94, 1.09), and 1.00 (0.91, 1.10), respectively. 
the harmonic mean elimination half-life was 45.7 and 43.4 hours for rofecoxib + digoxin and placebo + digoxin treatments, respectively. 
the mean (sd) cumulative urinary excretion of immunoreactive digoxin after concurrent treatment with rofecoxib or placebo was 228.2 (+/- 30.8) and 235.1 (+/- 39.1) micrograms/120 hours, respectively. 
rofecoxib did not influence the plasma pharmacokinetics or renal elimination of a single oral dose of digoxin.
[quantitative approach to treatment with incisive neuroleptics by therapeutic monitoring]; the problems encountered during the longterm treatment of psychotic patients with neuroleptics are illustrated by six typical case reports. 
adl 8-2698, a trans-3,4-dimethyl-4-(3-hydroxyphenyl) piperidine, prevents gastrointestinal effects of intravenous morphine without affecting analgesia.

adl-8-2698 is a novel peripherally restricted opioid antagonist that may selectively prevent opioid-induced gastrointestinal effects without reversing analgesia. 
gastrointestinal transit time (lactulose hydrogen breath test) was measured in 14 volunteers with oral and intravenous placebo, oral placebo and intravenous morphine (0.05 mg x kg(-1)), and oral adl 8-2698 (4 mg) and intravenous morphine (0.05 mg x kg(-1)) in a double blind, cross-over study. 
morphine prolonged gastrointestinal transit time from 69 to 103 minutes (p = .005); this was prevented by adl 8-2698 (p = .004). 
postoperatively, 45 patients were randomly assigned in a double-blind fashion to receive adl 8-2698 (4 mg) or placebo and intravenous morphine (0.15 mg/kg) or to receive oral and intravenous placebo. 
morphine analgesia and pupil constriction were unaffected by adl 8-2698 and differed from placebo (p < .002). 
we conclude that adl 8-2698 prevents morphine-induced increases in gastrointestinal transit time by means of selective peripheral opioid anitagonism without affecting central opioid analgesia.
slow-channel calcium blockers, such as verapamil, diltiazem and nifedipine, inhibit platelet activation in vitro, and decrease platelet adhesion intravascularly. 
[the effect of sandimmune on the activity of mixed-function mono-oxidases in the liver microsomes]
the effects of the immunodepressant--the drug sandimmune--on hepatic microsomal monooxygenase activities were studied. 
rifampin and warfarin: a drug interaction.

the drug interaction between warfarin and rifampin is not well known. 
rifampin has been reported to increase the warfarin requirements in human subjects ingesting these agents simultaneously. 
the concomitant administration of rifampin and warfarin resulted in the need for an unusually high maintenance dose of warfarin (20 mg per day) in order to produce a therapeutic effect. 
withdrawal of rifampin decreased the warfarin requirement by 50%. 
this effect may be mediated by the ability of rifampin to induce microsomal enzymes and, thus, the catabolism of warfarin. 
the effect of rifampin on the warfarin requirement of our patient appeared to be maximal 5 to 7 days after the initiation of rifampin and extended a similar length of time after rifampin withdrawal. 
the thiazolidinediones (rosiglitazone and pioglitazone), a new class of oral antidiabetic agents, are "insulin sensitizers" 
effect of probenecid on the apparent volume of distribution and elimination of cloxacillin.

(1968, 1970), the higher serum concentrations of penicillins and cephaloridine reached after administration of probenecid are due not only to slower renal elimination but also to an altered distribution in the body. 
to determine whether probenecid has a direct effect on the distribution of cloxacillin, the elimination and distribution of cloxacillin was studied in six patients, five lacking kidney function and one with a partially impaired renal function, in the presence or absence of probenecid. 
no significant difference was found between the mean values of the volume of distribution of cloxacillin with and without probenecid (13.0 and 12.6 liters, respectively). 
this might be explained by a blockade by probenecid of the elimination of cloxacillin by the liver.
cytochalasin d at 10 microm preferentially blocked the secretory effect of carbachol and its synergism with camp, whereas it had no effect on histamine- or camp-stimulated acid secretion within 15 min. 
cytochalasin d inhibited the carbachol-stimulated intracellular ca(2+) concentration ([ca(2+)](i)) increase due to release from the ca(2+) store. 
glucose and insulin exert additive ocular and renal vasodilator effects on healthy humans.

aims/hypothesis: there is evidence that insulin and glucose cause renal and ocular vasodilation. 
haemodynamic effects of glucose and insulin were additive when somatostatin was co-administered but not under basal conditions. 
conclusions/interpretation: glucose and insulin can exert additive vasodilator properties on renal and ocular circulation. 
dual effect of ouabain on the palytoxin-induced contraction and norepinephrine release in the guinea-pig vas deferens.
palytoxin (ptx), c129h223n3o54, isolated from marine coelenterates of palythoa tuberculosa, caused a first rapid contraction followed by the slow phasic contraction of guinea-pig vas deferens. 
in the presence of ouabain (10(-5) m), ptx (10(-8) m) failed to cause the first contraction; 
when ouabain was applied to the muscle in the presence of phentolamine, both first and second contractile responses to ptx were abolished. 
exposure of the muscle to ouabain (10(-5) m) markedly increased the ptx-induced release. 
the second response is due to a release of norepinephrine from nerves and was potentiated by ouabain through the increase in the norepinephrine release, whereas the first response was not due to the norepinephrine release but presumably to a direct action on smooth muscle cell and was inhibited by ouabain. 
as immediate-early genes (iegs) are thought to play a critical role in mediating stimulus-induced neural plasticity, ieg response induced by methamphetamine (meth) has been characterized to define the changes in gene expression that may underlie its long-lasting behavioral effects. 
using in situ hybridization, we observed that meth caused a rapid and transient dose-dependent increase in arc mrna level in the striatum and cortex that was abolished by pretreatment with the specific dopamine d1 receptor antagonist sch-23390 but not by an atypical neuroleptic clozapine. 
in vitro interaction of prostaglandin f2alpha and oxytocin in placental vessels.

the interaction of prostaglandin f2alpha and synthetic oxytocin on placental vessels was studied in vitro. 
in seven experiments reactions to norepinephrine and oxytocin were pgf2alpha. 
pgf2alpha produced significantly increased vasoconstriction after a single administration of oxytocin. 
there is thus an enhancement effect of pgf2alpha upon the reaction of placental vessels to oxytocin in vitro.
selective survival in pentazocine and tripelennamine of pseudomonas aeruginosa serotype o11 from drug addicts.

the growth of pseudomonas aeruginosa, particularly serotype o11, in pentazocine and tripelennamine 
twelve strains of staphylococcus aureus (a frequent cause of infection in heroin, but not in pentazocine and tripelennamine, addicts) were completely inhibited by the drug combination. 
dose-response curves (derived from the results of using the tablets as well as pure powders) showed that tripelennamine was responsible for the inhibitory activity, which was partially antagonized by pentazocine. 
aureus, to survive in pentazocine and tripelennamine may explain in part a shift from s. 
acetaminophen, lidocaine, phenobarbital, quinidine, theophylline, and valproic acid were added to pooled human serum at therapeutic concentrations. 
the following eight target drug/added drug combinations were studied: acetaminophen/phenobarbital. 
acetaminophen/theophylline, lidocaine/quinidine, phenobarbital/acetaminophen, phenobarbital/valproic acid, quinidine/lidocaine, theophylline/acetaminophen, and valproic acid/phenobarbital. 
similarly dialyzed were phenobarbital, quinidine, and theophylline, both alone at therapeutic concentrations in serum and with ethanol at three different concentrations in serum. 
acetaminophen diminished the binding of theophylline to human serum by a net change of 5.7% (percentage increase in free drug fraction [fdf], 11.0%) at 662 micromol/l and by a net change of 7.1% (percentage increase in fdf, 13.7%) at 1324 micromol/l. 
theophylline decreased the binding of acetaminophen by a net change of 6.8% (percentage increase in fdf, 8.8%) at 277.5 micromol/l; 
valproic acid diminished binding of phenobarbital by a net change of 9.9% (percentage increase in fdf, 21.2%) at 1732 micromol/l. 
coingestion of acetaminophen with theophylline, phenobarbital with acetaminophen, and valproic acid with phenobarbital at high to toxic concentrations decreases the binding of the target drug. 
acute hydrocortisone administration does not affect subjective responses to d-amphetamine in humans.

however, the effects of stress and glucocorticoids on the subjective and behavioral effects of psychostimulants have not been well studied in humans. 
objectives: to examine the effects of acute hydrocortisone pretreatment on the subjective and behavioral effects of d-amphetamine. 
methods: hydrocortisone (100 mg) and d-amphetamine (20 mg) were administered orally to 16 healthy male and female volunteers in a four-session, placebo-controlled, within-subject, crossover design. 
however, hydrocortisone pretreatment did not affect any of the physiological, behavioral, or subjective effects of d-amphetamine. 
conclusions: in contrast to the effects of glucocorticoids in rodent studies, these results indicate that an acute increase in cortisol does not enhance the psychostimulant effects of d-amphetamine in humans.
[the gaba-ergic system and brain edema]
it has been shown in rats with experimental toxic and traumatic edemas that picrotoxin (1 mg/kg) removes the antiedematous action of diazepam, phenazepam, phenibut and amizyl and reduces the action of phentolamine. 
high-dose cisplatin with sodium thiosulfate protection.

sodium thiosulfate is a neutralizing agent for cisplatin that protects against renal damage. 
to determine whether injection of thiosulfate would permit larger doses of cisplatin to be administered, a fixed 9.9-g/m2 dose of thiosulfate was given intravenously over three hours concurrently with escalating doses of cisplatin. 
cisplatin was administered over the last two hours of the thiosulfate infusion. 
comparison of cisplatin pharmacokinetics in patients treated with 202.5 mg/m2 plus thiosulfate to those in patients treated with 100 mg/m2 without thiosulfate indicated that there were no changes in the elimination rate constant, volume of distribution, or total body clearance of cisplatin. 
this study demonstrates that concurrent administration of thiosulfate permits at least a twofold increase in dose and total exposure to cisplatin.
interactions of cobalt and iron in absorption and retention.

the effects of supplementary oral cobalt and iron, as well as the interaction between both at the absorption site, fecal and urinary excretion as well as the retention of these trace elements were determined by using four diets containing either 9 or 63 micrograms/kg of co and 48 or 446 mg/kg of fe over a period of 19 days in a total of 24 rats. 
cobalt excretion was enhanced by supplementary cobalt; 
additional iron significantly inhibited the absorption of cobalt in both dietary cobalt treatments. 
the lower rate of absorption in the groups receiving 446 mg fe instead of 48 mg of fe per kg diet resulted in a decreased renal excretion of cobalt. 
consequently, the effect of iron on the retention of cobalt was lower than on absorption. 
because of the low dietary cobalt concentration as compared to the iron contents of the diets, no effect of cobalt on iron absorption and excretion occurred. 
differences in iron balance were only observed between both dietary concentrations, showing a higher absolute but a lower relative absorption as well as retention in the groups fed further fe.(abstract truncated at 250 words)
olanzapine, a thienobenzodiazepine derivative, is a second generation (atypical) antipsychotic agent which has proven efficacy against the positive and negative symptoms of schizophrenia. 
in large, well controlled trials in patients with schizophrenia or related psychoses, olanzapine 5 to 20 mg/day was significantly superior to haloperidol 5 to 20 mg/day in overall improvements in psychopathology rating scales and in the treatment of depressive and negative symptoms, and was comparable in effects on positive psychotic symptoms. 
the 1-year risk of relapse (rehospitalisation) was significantly lower with olanzapine than with haloperidol treatment. 
in the first double-blind comparative study (28-week) of olanzapine and risperidone, olanzapine 10 to 20 mg/day proved to be significantly more effective than risperidone 4 to 12 mg/day in the treatment of negative and depressive symptoms but not on overall psychopathology symptoms. 
in contrast, preliminary results from an 8-week controlled study suggested risperidone 2 to 6 mg/day was superior to olanzapine 5 to 20 mg/day against positive and anxiety/depressive symptoms (p < 0.05), although consistent with the first study, both agents demonstrated similar efficacy on measures of overall psychopathology. 
improvements in general cognitive function seen with olanzapine treatment in a 1-year controlled study of patients with early-phase schizophrenia, were significantly greater than changes seen with either risperidone or haloperidol. 
however, preliminary results from an 8-week trial showed comparable cognitive enhancing effects of olanzapine and risperidone treatment in patients with schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder. 
several studies indicate that olanzapine has benefits against symptoms of aggression and agitation, while other studies strongly support the effectiveness of olanzapine in the treatment of depressive symptomatology. 
olanzapine is associated with significantly fewer extrapyramidal symptoms than haloperidol and risperidone. 
in addition, olanzapine is not associated with a risk of agranulocytosis as seen with clozapine or clinically significant hyperprolactinaemia as seen with risperidone or prolongation of the qt interval. 
in comparison with haloperidol, the adverse events reported significantly more frequently with olanzapine in > or = 3.5% of patients were dry mouth, bodyweight gain and increased appetite and compared with risperidone, only bodyweight gain occurred significantly more frequently with olanzapine. 
pharmacoeconomic analyses indicate that olanzapine does not significantly increase, and may even decrease, the overall direct treatment costs of schizophrenia, compared with haloperidol. 
compared with risperidone, olanzapine has also been reported to decrease overall treatment costs, despite the several-fold higher daily acquisition cost of the drug. 
olanzapine treatment improves quality of life in patients with schizophrenia and related psychoses to a greater extent than haloperidol, and to broadly the same extent as risperidone. 
conclusions: olanzapine demonstrated superior antipsychotic efficacy compared with haloperidol in the treatment of acute phase schizophrenia, and in the treatment of some patients with first-episode or treatment-resistant schizophrenia. 
the reduced risk of adverse events and therapeutic superiority compared with haloperidol and risperidone in the treatment of negative and depressive symptoms support the choice of olanzapine as a first-line option in the management of schizophrenia in the acute phase and for the maintenance of treatment response.
activity of buforin ii alone and in combination with azithromycin and minocycline against cryptosporidium parvum in cell culture.

the in vitro anti-cryptosporidial activity of buforin ii alone and in combination with azithromycin and minocycline was investigated. 
moreover, its activity was enhanced when it was combined with either azithromycin or minocycline with 90% parasite reduction at the highest concentration tested. 
buforin ii may be active in inhibiting cryptosporidium parvum growth in vitro upon combination with either azithromycin or minocycline.
the mode of toxic action of the pesticide gliftor: the metabolism of 1,3-difluoroacetone to (-)-erythro-fluorocitrate.

the biochemical toxicology of 1,3-difluoroacetone, a known metabolite of the major ingredient of the pesticide gliftor (1,3-difluoro-2-propanol), was investigated in vivo and in vitro. 
rat kidney homogenates supplemented with coenzyme a, atp, oxaloacetate, and mg2+ converted 1,3-difluoroacetone to (-)-erythro-fluorocitrate in vitro. 
administration of 1,3-difluoroacetone (100 mg kg(-1) body weight) to rats in vivo resulted in (-)-erythro-fluorocitrate synthesis in the kidney, which was preceded by an elevation in fluoride levels and followed by citrate accumulation. 
animals dosed with 1,3-difluoroacetone did not display the 2-3 hour lag phase in either (-)-erythro-fluorocitrate synthesis or in citrate and fluoride accumulation characteristic of animals dosed with 1,3-difluoro-2-propanol. 
we demonstrate that the conversion of 1,3-difluoro-2-propanol to 1,3-difluoroacetone by an nad+-dependent oxidation is the rate-limiting step in the synthesis of the toxic product, (-)-erythro-fluorocitrate from 1,3-difluoro-2-propanol. 
prior administration of 4-methylpyrazole (90 mg kg(-1) body weight) was shown to prevent the conversion of 1,3-difluoro-2-propanol (100 mg kg(-1) body weight) to (-)-erythro-fluorocitrate in vivo and to eliminate the fluoride and citrate elevations seen in 1,3-difluoro-2-propanol-intoxicated animals. 
however, administration of 4-methylpyrazole (90 mg kg(-1) body weight) to rats 2 hours prior to 1,3-difluoroacetone (100 mg kg(-1) body weight) was ineffective in preventing (-)-erythro-fluorocitrate synthesis and did not diminish fluoride or citrate accumulation in vivo. 
we conclude that the prophylactic and antidotal properties of 4-methylpyrazole seen in animals treated with 1,3-difluoro-2-propanol derive from its capacity to inhibit the nad+-dependent oxidation responsible for converting 1,3-difluoro-2-propanol to 1,3-difluoroacetone in the committed step of the toxic pathway.
effect of estradiol on endotoxin-induced changes in steroid hormone levels and lethality in male rats.
we examined the effect of exogenous estradiol on the changes in serum steroid hormone levels induced by a nonlethal dose of escherichia coli endotoxin in male rats and the deaths due to nonlethal and lethal doses of endotoxin. 
injection of estradiol 5 min before a nonlethal dose of endotoxin changed the serum sex steroid hormone response of male rats to endotoxin. 
the serum estrogen concentrations of estradiol + endotoxin-treated rats decreased by 50%, while those of the endotoxin-treated rats increased (2- to 5-fold). 
the serum androgen concentrations of estradiol + endotoxin-treated rats did not change significantly, while those of endotoxin-treated rats dropped to 30-40%
exogenous estradiol also appeared to influence the percentage of endotoxin-induced deaths in a dose-dependent manner. 
these results, together with the known relationships between estrogen and the immune response, suggest that estrogens affect the course of septic shock in a complex fashion and may have either protective or deleterious effect.
rhabdomyolysis secondary to a drug interaction between simvastatin and clarithromycin.

objective: to report a case of rhabdomyolysis resulting from concomitant use of clarithromycin and simvastatin. 
discussion: clarithromycin is a potent inhibitor of cyp3a4, the major enzyme responsible for simvastatin metabolism. 
the concomitant administration of macrolide antibiotics and other hydroxymethylglutaryl coenzyme a (hmg-coa) reductase inhibitors have resulted in previous reports of rhabdomyolysis. 
conclusions: macrolide antibiotics inhibit the metabolism of hmg-coa reductase inhibitors that are metabolized by cyp3a4 (i.e., atorvastatin, cerivastatin, lovastatin, simvastatin). 
pharmacokinetic evaluation of the digoxin-amiodarone interaction.

amiodarone is known to raise serum digoxin levels. 
the pharmacokinetic variables for digoxin were determined after a 1.0 mg intravenous dose of digoxin in each subject, before and after oral amiodarone, 400 mg daily for 3 weeks. 
during amiodarone administration, systemic clearance of digoxin was reduced from 234 +/- 72 ml/min (mean +/- standard deviation) to 172 +/- 33 ml/min (p less than 0.01). 
amiodarone caused a three- to fivefold increase in serum reverse triiodothyronine levels, but changes in thyroid function were not quantitatively related to the changes in digoxin pharmacokinetics. 
these alterations in digoxin pharmacokinetics produced by amiodarone explain the increase in serum digoxin level that has been observed when this drug combination has been used clinically.
interaction of gentamycin and atracurium in anaesthetised horses.

evoked hind limb digital extensor tension (hoof twitch) was maintained at 40% of baseline for 1 h by atracurium infusion in 7 horses anaesthetised with halothane. 
atracurium was again given by infusion to maintain 40% twitch for a second hour, then 2 mg gentamycin/kg bwt were given i.v. 
recovery of hoof twitch from 50% to 75% took 7.7 +/- 0.7 min for atracurium alone and 11.5 +/- 2.7 min for atracurium plus gentamycin (p = 0.03). 
recovery from 50% twitch to 75% fade recovery took 13.8 +/- 0.8 min for atracurium alone and 13.7 +/- 1.2 min for atracurium plus gentamycin. 
at 75% recovery of fade, hoof twitch was 87 +/- 3% for atracurium alone and 82 +/- 4% for atracurium plus gentamycin. 
it was concluded that, although gentamycin did augment the neuromuscular blockade of atracurium, the effect was minimal.
the literature provides considerable evidence indicating that several, but not all antihistaminics, are indeed analgesic agents and some are analgesic adjuvants as well.
those for which effectiveness is reported includes diphenhydramine, hydroxyzine, orphenadrine, pyrilamine, phenyltoloxamine, promethazine, methdilazine, and tripelennamine. 
pharmacokinetic interaction between amprenavir and rifabutin or rifampin in healthy males.

the objective of this study was to determine if there is a pharmacokinetic interaction when amprenavir is given with rifabutin or rifampin and to determine the effects of these drugs on the erythromycin breath test (ermbt). 
all subjects received amprenavir (1,200 mg twice a day) for 4 days, followed by a 7-day washout period, followed by either rifabutin (300 mg once a day [qd]) (cohort 1) or rifampin (600 mg qd) (cohort 2) for 14 days. 
cohort 1 then received amprenavir plus rifabutin for 10 days, and cohort 2 received amprenavir plus rifampin for 4 days. 
serial plasma and urine samples for measurement of amprenavir, rifabutin, and rifampin and their 25-o-desacetyl metabolites, were measured by high-performance liquid chromatography. 
rifabutin did not significantly affect amprenavir's pharmacokinetics. 
amprenavir significantly increased the area under the curve at steady state (auc(ss)) of rifabutin by 2.93-fold and the auc(ss) of 25-o-desacetylrifabutin by 13.3-fold. 
rifampin significantly decreased the auc(ss) of amprenavir by 82%, but amprenavir had no effect on rifampin pharmacokinetics. 
the results of the ermbt after 2 weeks of rifabutin and rifampin therapy were increased 187 and 156%, respectively. 
amprenavir plus rifampin was well tolerated. 
amprenavir plus rifabutin was poorly tolerated, and 5 of 11 subjects discontinued therapy. 
rifampin markedly increases the metabolic clearance of amprenavir, and coadministration is contraindicated. 
amprenavir significantly decreases clearance of rifabutin and 25-o-desacetylrifabutin, and the combination is poorly tolerated. 
amprenavir inhibits the ermbt, and rifampin and rifabutin are equipotent inducers of the ermbt.
carbamazepine overdose recognized by a tricyclic antidepressant assay.

we report the case of an adolescent with altered consciousness caused by carbamazepine overdose with a positive tricyclic antidepressant level to alert clinicians to the cross-reactivity of carbamazepine with a toxicology screen for tricyclic antidepressants.
the effects of chlordiazepoxide, amphetamine and cocaine on bar-press behavior in normal and genetically nervous dogs.

studies on two strains of pointer dogs have demonstrated that administration of a benzodiazepine (chlordiazepoxide) facilitates acquisition of goal-directed behavior in "genetically nervous"
the concomitant administration of either cocaine or amphetamine, compounds which inhibit neuronal reuptake of norepinephrine, disrupts the behavioral response of the genetically nervous e-strain subjects to a far greater extent than the stable a-strain subjects. 
many people use both alcohol and nicotine (i.e., cigarettes and other tobacco products). 
the initiation of alcohol or nicotine use may be precipitated by similar personality characteristics in the user, such as impulsivity and sensation seeking. 
moreover, the mechanisms underlying the development of dependence may be similar for alcohol and nicotine. 
therapeutic drug monitoring can avoid iatrogenic alterations caused by 99mtc-methylene diphosphonate (mdp)-gentamicin interaction.

gentamicin is an aminoglycoside antibiotic used to treat a wide variety of infections caused by gram-negative organisms, but it is potentially toxic to the kidneys. 
due to its nephrotoxicity, gentamicin may cause abnormal renal uptake to be seen on 99mtc-mdp bone scintigraphy. 
therapeutic drug monitoring (tdm) of gentamicin therapy, and bone scintigraphy employing 99mtc-mdp as the radiopharmaceutical was carried out in 22 patients. 
the data presented here demonstrate that with serial pharmacokinetic dosing of gentamicin, the iatrogenic alteration caused by gentamicin therapy can be avoided.
on the basis of the estimated number of regular users of intravenous amphetamine in ontario, the mortality rate in such users is at least four times as high as in the general population of the same age, and is comparable to that in alcoholics and heroin addicts. 
however, the absolute number of alcohol-related deaths is far greater than the number of deaths in amphetamine or heroin users.
by contrast, spermidine (1 mm) and putrescine (1 mm) had no significant effect on the translocation when added alone. 
spermine, and to a lesser extent, spermidine, enhanced the translocating action of oleate and increased its effectiveness in transferring the phosphohydrolase from the soluble to the microsomal fraction. 
thirty male rats of the fischer-344 strain were divided into three equal groups and were given injections of trimethyl lead (tml) (8.0 or 17.0 mg/kg/ml sc) or the saline vehicle. 
the 20% v/v solution of alcohol was prepared in water from a stock solution of 95% ethanol. 
these results suggest that exposure to environmental lead may alter the biological and behavioral responsiveness of an animal to alcohol.
for the calcium-entry blocking agents now available in the united states (verapamil, nifedipine and diltiazem), these data appeared well after clinical patterns of use evolved. 
by the nonlinear kinetic characteristics for verapamil and diltiazem (and probably for nifedipine, as well) and the derivative implications for decreased dosing frequency requirements; 
in this study we investigated the effect of ginsenosides on high threshold voltage-dependent ca(2+) channel subtypes using their selective ca(2+) channel blockers nimodipine (l-type), omega-conotoxin gvia (n-type), or omega-agatoxin iva (p-type) in bovine chromaffin cells. 
nimodipine had no effect on ginsenosides response. 
these data suggest that ginsenosides are negatively coupled to three types of calcium channels in bovine chromaffin cell, including an omega-conotoxin gvia-sensitive (n-type) channel, an omega-agatoxin iva-sensitive (p-type) channel and nimodipine/omega-conotoxin gvia/omega-agatoxin via-resistant (presumptive q-type) channel. 
thus, the selective regulation of voltage-dependent ca(2+) subtypes by ginsenosides in bovine chromaffin cell could be the cellular basis of antistress effects induced by ginseng.
[dose-time effects of competitive displacement of radiopertechnetate by sodium perchlorate following oral and intravenous administration]
the effect of various doses of sodium perchlorate in several dose fractions on the extent and the time scale of displacement of radiopertechnetate, in dependence on application mode, was studied. 
an intravenous dose of 50 mg perchlorate was in respect of competitive suppression of organs actively concentrating pertechnetate as effective as intravenous 1000 mg clo-4- simultaneously or 1000 mg orally 30 min before the injection of radiopertechnetate. 
an intravenous injection of perchlorate given later also produces a complete and immediately beginning depletion of pertechnetate already accumulated in the thyroid, within a period of 195 min after 99m-tco-4-injection with a corresponding increase in blood levels. 
note: dissolution of aerosol particles of budesonide in survanta, a model lung surfactant.

the effect of a pulmonary surfactant extract from bovine lung, survanta, on the dissolution rate of aerosol particles of budesonide was determined. 
aerosol particles of budesonide were generated from an ethanol solution, dried, and collected by a cascade impactor for characterization or by a liquid impinger for dissolution experiments. 
survanta increased the extent of dissolution of budesonide in proportion to the added concentration, which was also verified by equilibrium solubilization studies. 
survanta also increased rate of dissolution, in a manner similar to sodium dodecyl sulfate. 
analysis of the concentration of budesonide following ultracentrifugation indicated that there is rapid equilibration of budesonide between the survanta and aqueous phase. 
since photic evoked potential components are representations of neural pathways which are activated during photic stimulation, study of the effects of alcohol on these components may help to trace pathways which are affected by alcohol. 
in the present study, evoked potentials were recorded at 5, 20, and 40 min following ip injections of saline, ethanol (2.0 g/kg), physostigmine (0.6 mg/kg) or atropine (15.0 mg/kg) on separate days. 
physostigmine pretreatment augmented the depressant effect of alcohol on the early components p1 and n1, while attenuating alcohol's influence on components p2 and p3. 
atropine, either alone or in combination with alcohol, produced approximately the same degree of enhancement of component p2. 
little has been studied of the adverse effects of the exposure of the liver to the interaction of ethanol with its congeners and acetaldehyde, coexisting in the contents of alcoholic beverages. 
two groups (sh/da; sh/fa) were submitted to daily treatment with synthetic hydroalcoholic solutions containing ethanol, methanol, higher alcohols and acetaldehyde in the same proportions as those found in most common distilled and fermented alcoholic beverages; 
these results suggest that the hepatoxicity of ethanol in alcoholic beverages is enhanced by interaction with its congeners and acetaldehyde; 
the percentage of neurons hyperpolarized by mu-, delta(1)-, and kappa-selective opioids was significantly reduced when 1% but not < 
antimicrobial activity of ganoderma lucidum extract alone and in combination with some antibiotics.

to investigate the effects of antimicrobial combinations of gl with four kinds of antibiotics (ampicillin, cefazolin, oxytetracycline and chloramphenicol), the fractional inhibitory concentration index (fici) was determined by checkerboard assay for each strain. 
the antimicrobial combinations of gl with four antibiotics resulted in additive effect in most instances, synergism in two instances, and antagonism in two instances. 
synergism was observed when gl was combined with cefazolin against bacillus subtilis and klebsiella oxytoca.
the effects of ruthenium red (rr) on inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (insp(3))-induced responses were studied in rat bone marrow megakaryocytes with the patch-clamp whole-cell recording technique in combination with fura-2 microfluorometry. 
administering insp(3) together with rr (100-500 microm) inhibited insp(3)-induced responses (both ca(2+) and current responses) in a dose-dependent fashion. 
pretreatment of megakaryocytes with extracellular rr (50 microm) also inhibited insp(3)-induced responses. 
in contrast, in isolated single pancreatic acinar cells, rr had no effect on insp(3)-induced responses. 
in addition, we have shown that rr is a useful pharmacological tool with which to examine the insp(3)-mediated responses of megakaryocytes.
resveratrol (5-35 micromol/l) induced concentration-dependent relaxation of mesenteric arteries preconstricted with noradrenaline (8 micromol/l) or kcl (125 mmol/l) from both lean and dietary-obese rats. 
however, l-name (100 and 300 micromol/l) did not alter the effects of reseveratrol on arteries from dietary-obese rats, giving superimposed concentration-responses curves. 
indomethacin was also ineffective in altering resveratrol activity in arteries from both lean and dietary-obese rats. 
in noradrenaline-precontracted arteries from dietary-obese rats, responses to resveratrol were not attenuated by endothelial denudation, indicating an action independent of the endothelium. 
this study indicates that: (a) the maximal effects of resveratrol on resistance arteries from lean and dietary-obese rats are not effected by endothelial dysfunction, and (b) the effects of resveratrol in lean animals (where endothelial function is not impaired), but not in dietary-obese rats, are mediated via no.
lack of interaction between levofloxacin and oxycodone: pharmacokinetics and drug disposition.

previous studies have demonstrated a significant reduction in the oral bioavailability of trovafloxacin and ciprofloxacin when administered concomitantly with an intravenous opiate such as morphine. 
this decrease in absorption results in a 36% and 50% lower auc for trovafloxacin and ciprofloxacin, respectively, which could cause clinical failures. 
the authors investigated the possibility of a similar interaction between oxycodone and levofloxacin. 
1 hour after starting the oxycodone or levofloxacin 500 mg p.o. 
there was not a significant difference (p > 0.05) in auc (48.59 +/- 8.52 vs. 49.9 +/- 9.93), cmax (7.73 +/- 2.6 vs. 6.6 +/- 2.0), and tmax (1.1 +/- 0.6 vs. 1.6 +/- 1.1) for levofloxacin versus levofloxacin/oxycodone regimens. 
it was concluded that oral oxycodone and levofloxacin can be administered concomitantly without a significant decrease in auc, cmax, or tmax.
here we show that a combination of galangin or 3,7-dihydroxyflavone with vancomycin may be used to sensitize resistant strains of enterococcus faecalis and enterococcus faecium to the level of vancomycin-sensitive strains. 
dexamethasone and retinyl acetate similarly inhibit and stimulate egf- or insulin-induced proliferation of prostatic epithelium.
prostatic epithelium proliferates in a defined medium consisting of basal medium rpmi1640 containing transferrin (1 microgram/ml), egf (10 ng/ml), and insulin (3.7 micrograms/ml or 0.1 iu/ml). 
although neither dexamethasone nor retinyl acetate affected the proliferation of prostatic epithelium in rpmi1640 containing transferrin alone, they modify the mitogenic effect of egf and insulin. 
dexamethasone at 10(-10) m or retinyl acetate at about 3 x 10(-9) m inhibits proliferation stimulated by egf. 
higher concentrations of dexamethasone (10(-8) - 10(-6) m) or retinyl acetate (3 x 10(-8) - 10(-7) m) enhance the mitogenic activity of egf. 
dexamethasone had a similar effect in the presence of insulin. 
however, retinyl acetate stimulated, but did not significantly inhibit, proliferation in the presence of insulin. 
these results suggest that both dexamethasone and retinyl acetate, and possibly other glucocorticoids and retinoids, may regulate the proliferation of prostate epithelium by a dose-dependent modification of the activity of insulin and egf.
the effects of concomitant phenytoin administration on the steady-state pharmacokinetics of quetiapine.

quetiapine fumarate ('seroquel') is a newly introduced atypical antipsychotic with demonstrated efficacy in the treatment of positive and negative symptoms of schizophrenia. 
this study demonstrated that the potent cytochrome p450 enzyme-inducer phenytoin did indeed have a marked effect on the metabolism of quetiapine, resulting in a 5-fold increase in clearance when administered concomitantly to patients with dsm-iv-diagnosed schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, or bipolar disorder. 
changes in urinary homocysteine following synthetic steroidal estrogen and progestogen administration to rats.
the present work involved the administration of both ethynyl estradiol and levonorgestrel to groups of rats, followed by determination of the homocysteine excretion rate in urine. 
the results indicate that a statistically significant difference exists between the excreted levels of homocysteine in the urine of both control and levonorgestrel-treated rats and the levels shown by rats treated with ethynyl estradiol. 
[stimulation by cerulein--an analog of the octapeptide cholecystokinin--of 3h-spiroperidol binding after the long-term administration of neuroleptics]
it has been established in experiments on white male rats that prolonged administration (twice a day for 14 days) of haloperidol (0.25 mg/kg) and pyreneperone (0.25 mg/kg) resulted in the reduced interaction between 3h-spiroperidol and low affinity binding sites for apomorphine in subcortical structures, whereas 3h-spiroperidol binding with high affinity binding sites for apomorphine increased both in the frontal cortex and subcortical structures of the forebrain. 
after prolonged administration of neuroleptics the displacing effect of cerulein, an analog of cholecystokinin octapeptide, was replaced by the stimulant action on 3h-spiroperidol binding. 
it is assumed that increased interaction between 3h-spiroperidol and high affinity binding sites for apomorphine on dopamine2- and serotonin2-receptors underlies the antipsychotic action of neuroleptics after their prolonged administration. 
lack of an effect of azithromycin on the disposition of zidovudine and dideoxyinosine in hiv-infected patients.
two studies were conducted in hiv-infected subjects to assess the potential for azithromycin to interact with zidovudine and dideoxyinosine. 
the zidovudine study dosed subjects with 1200 mg/day of azithromycin (n = 7) (later changed to 600 mg/day [n = 5]) for days 8 to 21 of a 21-day course of 100 mg, five times/day of zidovudine. 
subjects treated with 200 mg of dideoxyinosine twice daily for 21 days received 1200 mg of azithromycin or an equivalent amount of placebo/day for days 8 to 21. 
antiretroviral plasma and urine sampling were conducted on days 1, 7, and 21 for zidovudine and on days 7 and 21 for dideoxyinosine. 
azithromycin had no significant impact on the cmax and auc of zidovudine, although it significantly decreased the zidovudine tmax by 44% and increased the intracellular exposure to phosphorylated zidovudine by 110%. 
azithromycin had no significant effect on dideoxyinosine pharmacokinetics. 
based on the results of these studies, it is concluded that azithromycin may be safely coadministered with both zidovudine and dideoxyinosine.
concomitantly given thiazide diuretics did not interfere with the absorption of a tablet of digoxin. 
[a pharmacological analysis of the effect of angiotensin on stimulated gastric secretion]
chronic experiments on dogs with gastric fistulas were carried out to study the influence of angiotensin 1 and angiotensin 2 on pentagastrin- and histamine-induced gastric acid secretion. 
it was established that both angiotensins inhibited gastric acid secretion stimulated by pentagastrin but not by histamine. 
comparative analysis of the effects of stimulation and inhibition of cholino- and adrenoreceptors on this inhibitory action of angiotensins suggested the mediation of angiotensin influence through the modulation of cholinergic reactions of parietal cells in the stomach.
effect of dofetillide on the pharmacokinetics of digoxin.

the effect of dofetilide on the steady-state pharmacokinetics of digoxin was evaluated in a randomized, double-blind study. 
five days of dofetilide treatment did not significantly affect steady-state pharmacokinetic variables of digoxin compared with placebo; 
therefore, the use of dofetilide does not necessitate an adjustment in digoxin dose to maintain therapeutic digoxin levels.
we investigated the effects of adenosine receptor antagonists, caffeine, theophylline, 8-phenyltheophylline, and 8-cyclopentyl-1,3-dipropylxanthine (dpcpx), in a light/dark test in mice. 
the anxiogenic effects of theophylline were reduced by pretreatment with cgs 21680, an a2-selective agonist, but not by n6-cyclopentyladenosine (cpa), an a1-selective agonist. 
however, the antagonism of the theophylline-induced anxiogenic effects by cgs21680 was only observed in the time spent in the light zone, and dpcpx-induced anxiogenic effects were neither reversed by cgs 21680 nor by cpa. 
the intestinal absorption of arsenate(as(v)) has been investigated in the chick by means of the in situ ligated duodenal loop technique. 
by this procedure, it was observed that arsenate is rapidly and essentially completely absorbed (80-95%) from the lumen at as(v) concentrations up to 5 mm, declining to about 50% absorption at 50 mm. 
at stable as(v) concentrations greater than 1 mm, fractional mucosal cell accumulation of as(v) remains constant, while fractional transfer to the body declines. 
however, total mucosal accumulation of as(v) and that transferred to the body increase in a linear logarithmic fashion from 0.05 to 5 mm as(v). 
furthermore, arsenate and phosphate do not appear to share a common transport pathway in the duodenum and no evidence was obtained for any interaction between the two at this level. 
vitamin d3 administration to rachitic chicks was effective in significantly elevating duodenal arsenate absorption, acting primarily to enhance serosal transport.
diethyl pyrocarbonate, at ph 7.0, was used to chemically modify exposed histidine residues on toxin a. 
modification of toxin a with diethyl pyrocarbonate abolished both its cytotoxic activity and the ability of the toxin to bind zn-sepharose gel. 
treatment of toxin a with [(14)c]-diethyl pyrocarbonate revealed concentration dependent labelling of histidine residues on the toxin molecules. 
the effects of diethyl pyrocarbonate could be reversed by hydroxylamine treatment. 
exposed histidines on toxin a are available for zinc chelation, and these have been exploited in the development of a novel purification protocol for toxin a using zinc-chelating chromatography.
failure of neomycin to modify acth induced hypertension in sheep.
studies in rats have shown that neomycin administration attenuates certain types of adrenocortical steroid dependent hypertension, including acth hypertension. 
the effects of oral neomycin on acth induced hypertension were examined in conscious sheep. 
neomycin has no effect on the blood pressure or metabolic responses to acth in sheep.
interaction between glycine and glutamate in the development of spontaneous motility in chick embryos.

the successive application of glycine (5 or 10 mg/kg egg weight (e.w.) and glutamate (15 mg/kg e.w.) in a 10 min interval significantly increased the activation of spontaneous motility of 17-day-old chick embryos in comparison with the effect of glutamate alone. 
numerous drug interactions are possible with some anticonvulsant agents, such as phenobarbitone and phenytoin, which affect hepatic microsomal enzyme systems. 
methods: clinical studies, case reports, and commentaries and editorials concerning sildenafil published in the international literature between january 1999 and august 2000 were identified through searches of medline, premedline, and international pharmaceutical abstracts, using the terms sildenafil, viagra, and erectile dysfunction. 
results: sildenafil has demonstrated effectiveness in men with erectile dysfunction associated with prostatectomy, radiation therapy, diabetes mellitus, certain neurologic disorders, and drug therapy (eg, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors [ssris]). 
however, patients with moderate to severe cardiovascular disease or those taking nitrate therapy are at increased risk for potentially serious cardiovascular adverse effects with sildenafil therapy. 
in addition, patients taking drugs that inhibit the cytochrome p450 3a4 isozyme, which metabolizes sildenafil, may experience increased drug concentrations and possible toxicity from normal doses of sildenafil. 
this article looks at five commonly used immunosuppressive drugs in turn (corticosteroids, cyclosporin, azathioprine, methotrexate, cyclophosphamide), discussing the main, non-infection, unwanted effects, ways to avoid them and what to do if problems arise. 
[the effect of cimetidine on the renal excretion of verografin and iodamide in dogs]
the intravenous injection of cimetidine in a dose of 20 mg/kg enhanced verografine and iodamide excretion in chronic canine experiments. 
the higher verografine and iodamide excretion was due to their increased renal tubular secretion. 
in dogs, cimetidine unchanged the secretion of cardiotrast, a test agent for anionic transport. 
possible extrarenal mechanisms of action of cimetidine on verografine and iodamide transport were also examined.
studies on the mechanism of action of miconazole: effect of miconazole on respiration and cell permeability of candida albicans.

the antifungal drug, miconazole nitrate, inhibits the growth of several species of candida. 
behavioral responses to repeated cocaine exposure in mice selectively bred for differential sensitivity to pentobarbital.

mice from the 20th generation of three lines divergently selected for response to pentobarbital-induced sedation times [long-sedation time (lst), short sedation time (sst), and randomly bred control (rbc)] were used to study cocaine-induced behavioral sensitization. 
the emerging roles of non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors in antiretroviral therapy.
the availability of potent non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (nnrti)-based regimens for antiretroviral therapy and concerns regarding protease inhibitor (pi)-related metabolic disturbances have led to significant shifts in treatment practices in hiv infection. 
nnrti-based regimens may have several advantages over pi-based therapy for initial or prolonged therapy, including more convenient administration regimens, lower tablet volume, fewer drug interactions, and central nervous system penetration. 
no data from prospective clinical trials currently exist comparing the 3 approved agents (efavirenz, nevirapine or delavirdine). 
both efavirenz and nevirapine have been compared to triple therapy with the pi indinavir over 48 weeks as initial therapy, with similar responses being observed with nevirapine regimens and superiority observed with efavirenz. 
a smaller 24-week study has suggested nevirapine may be superior to the pi nelfinavir. 
limited comparative data in patients with high viral loads treated with nevirapine- or delavirdine-based regimens currently exist. 
the superiority of efavirenz over indinavir-based regimens has been observed in comparative data in a subset of patients with high viral loads. 
efavirenz has demonstrated superiority over nelfinavir in nucleoside-experienced patients, although combining these 2 agents may represent the best approach in these circumstances. 
in order to provide information for the appropriate package insert labeling of progestin-only oral contraceptives (poc) in the us, a comprehensive review was made of norgestrel (0.075 mg) and norethindrone (0.35 mg), with the clinical differences indicated where applicable.  
fluvastatin is the first synthetic 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme a (hmgcoa) reductase inhibitor to be approved for clinical use, and has been studied extensively in humans since 1986. 
it is structurally distinct from the other currently available hmgcoa reductase inhibitors (lovastatin, simvastatin, and pravastatin), leading to unique biopharmaceutical properties relative to the other agents of this class. 
cholestyramine, an anionic-binding resin, has a considerable effect in lowering the rate and extent of fluvastatin bioavailability. 
although this effect was noted even when cholestyramine was given 4 hours prior to fluvastatin, this regimen did not result in diminished efficacy. 
further, no effects on either warfarin levels or prothrombin times were observed in a study involving concomitant administration of warfarin and fluvastatin. 
moreover, additional interaction studies with niacin and propranolol have not demonstrated any effect on fluvastatin plasma levels, and administration to a patient population chronically receiving digoxin resulted in no difference in the extent of bioavailability of digoxin relative to control data. 
cypermethrin-induced oxidative stress in rat brain and liver is prevented by vitamin e or allopurinol.

considering that the involvement of reactive oxygen species (ros) has been implicated in the toxicity of various pesticides, this study was designed to investigate the possibility of oxidative stress induction by cypermethrin, a type ii pyrethroid. 
pretreatment of rats with allopurinol (100 mg/kg, ip) or vitamin e (100 mg/kg per day, ig, for 3 days and a dose of 40 mg/kg on the 4th day) provided significant protection against the elevation of tbars levels in cerebral and hepatic tissues, induced by single high dose of oral cypermethrin administration within 4 h. 
thus, the results suggest that cypermethrin exposure of rats results in free radical-mediated tissue damage, as indicated by elevated cerebral and hepatic lipid peroxidation, which was prevented by allopurinol and vitamin e.
in this study, the effects of etofibrate upon chylomicron metabolism was tested by determination of the plasma kinetics of a chylomicron-like emulsion model in 12 patients with coronary artery disease, aged 59+/-11 years, (total cholesterol: 240+/-41 mg/dl; triglycerides: 188+/-42 mg/dl) submitted to a randomized, crossover, double-blind, placebo-controlled study with administration of 1 g per day etofibrate or placebo for 1-month. 
etofibrate elicited 62% enhancement of post-heparin lipolytic activity and 100% increase of 3h-triglyceride fractional clearance rate compared with placebo treatment. 
if taken 1 hour before indinavir (idv), didanosine does not affect idv exposure, despite persistent buffering effects.

concurrent administration of indinavir and didanosine significantly reduces the level of exposure to indinavir, but it is unclear how soon after didanosine administration indinavir may be given safely. 
we compared indinavir pharmacokinetics and gastric ph in 12 human immunodeficiency virus-positive patients by use of 800 mg of indinavir alone versus 800 mg of indinavir administered 1 h after didanosine administration. 
median gastric ph was significantly higher when indinavir was taken after didanosine administration; 
indinavir may be taken with a light meal 1 h following the administration of 400 mg of didanosine.
fluvoxamine inhibits the cyp2c9 catalyzed biotransformation of tolbutamide.

objective: our objective was to examine the interaction between fluvoxamine and tolbutamide to confirm that fluvoxamine inhibits cyp2c9. 
plasma was analyzed for tolbutamide, and urine was analyzed for tolbutamide and its two metabolites, 4-hydroxytolbutamide and carboxytolbutamide by means of hplc. 
results: during treatment with fluvoxamine, there was a statistically significant decrease in the median of the total clearance of tolbutamide, from 845 ml/h to 688 ml/h, among the volunteers who received 75 mg/d. 
the clearance by means of 4-hydroxytolbutamide and carboxytolbutamide was significantly reduced in both groups (ie, from 901 ml/h to 318 ml/h in the group that received 150 mg of tolbutamide per day and from 723 ml/h to 457 ml/h in the group that received 75 mg of tolbutamide per day). 
effect of diazepam and midazolam on the antinociceptive effect of morphine, metamizol and indomethacin in mice.
the influence of midazolam and diazepam on antinociceptive effect of morphine (10 mg/kg), metamizol (500 mg/kg) and indomethacin (10 mg/kg) was investigated in a mouse model using the tail-flick and hot-plate tests. 
benzodiazepines were administered to mice 30 min before applying the analgesic drugs. 
diazepam at doses of 0.25 mg/kg and 2.5 mg/kg injected with morphine was found to decrease the antinociceptive effect of morphine. 
similarly, diazepam decreased the antinociceptive effect of metamizol (only in the tail-flick test) and indomethacin. 
midazolam used at doses of 1.25 mg/kg and 2.5 mg/kg decreased the antinociceptive effect of morphine, metamizol (only in the tail-flick test) and indomethacin.
since the arrival of oral erection-supporting medication, patients want to know how safe sexual activity is in cardiovascular disease in general and during use of erection-supporting medication in particular. 
sildenafil is contraindicated in patients using long-acting nitrates or who may need to use short-acting nitrates, because the combination may cause a sharp fall of the blood pressure. 
no interactions have been observed with beta-receptor blockers, calcium antagonists, thiazide and loop diuretics and ace inhibitors. 
misonidazole protects mouse tumour and normal tissues from the toxicity of oral ccnu.

because the nitrosourea ccnu is given exclusively by the oral route in man, we have carried out studies in mice on the antitumour activity, acute toxicity and pharmacokinetics of oral ccnu, either alone or in combination with the chemosensitizer misonidazole. 
misonidazole reduced the antitumour activity of oral ccnu by dose modifying factors (dmf) of 0.58-0.71. 
misonidazole has a complex effect on oral ccnu pharmacokinetics. 
we propose these pharmacokinetic changes to be the underlying mechanism for the reduction of oral ccnu cytotoxicity by misonidazole. 
treatment with antidepressant drugs can directly interfere with blood glucose levels or may interact with hypoglycemic agents. 
imipramine (5 mg/kg), moclobemide (30 mg/kg), clonazepam (0.25 mg/kg), fluoxetine (20 mg/kg) sertraline (30 mg/kg) or vehicle was administered. 
an oral glucose overload of 1 ml of a 50% glucose solution was given to rats and blood glucose was determined after 30, 60 and 90 min. 
imipramine and clonazepam did not change fasting or overload glycemia. 
fluoxetine and moclobemide increased blood glucose at different times after the glucose overload. 
sertraline neutralized the increase of glycemia induced by oral glucose overload. 
in the second experiment, non-diabetic and streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats were fasted, and the same procedures were followed for estimation of glucose tolerance 30 min after glucose overload. 
again, sertraline neutralized the increase in glycemia after glucose overload both in diabetic and non-diabetic rats. 
the effects of ketamine and of innovar anesthesia on digitalis tolerance in dogs.

in a comparison of digitalis tolerance in dogs anesthetized with ketamine, innovar vet, or pentobarbital, the dosage of ouabain needed to cause ventricular tachycardia was significantly higher, as was the ld50 of ouabain, with ketamine or innovar than with pentobarbital. 
ventricular tachycardia induced by ouabain was generally converted to sinus rhythm following administration of innovar, ketamine, or droperidol but not after administration of fentayl alone or after pentobarbital.
concomitant cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone chemotherapy plus highly active antiretroviral therapy in patients with human immunodeficiency virus-related, non-hodgkin lymphoma.
to evaluate the impact of chemotherapy plus haart on the clinical course of patients with hiv-related, systemic, non-hodgkin lymphoma (hiv-nhl), the authors compared retrospectively a group of 24 patients with hiv-nhl who were treated with the cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone (chop) chemotherapy regimen plus haart with a group of 80 patients who were treated with chop chemotherapy or a chop-like regimen (i.e., cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, teniposide, and prednisone with vincristine plus bleomycin) without receiving antiretroviral therapy. 
antiretroviral regimens consisted of two reverse transcriptase inhibitors and one protease inhibitor. 
however, careful attention must be directed to cross toxicity and possible pharmacokinetic interactions between antiretroviral and antineoplastic drugs. 
the ec50 values for isoproterenol, which is not a substrate for norepinephrine uptake-1, were reduced in myocardium in functional classes ii to iii and iv compared with those in nonfailing myocardium. 
the uptake inhibitors cocaine and desipramine (3 mumol/liter) potentiated the positive inotropic effects of norepinephrine in nonfailing myocardium (p < 0.05) but not in functional class iv myocardium. 
radioligand binding experiments using the uptake inhibitor hydrogen-3 mazindol revealed a significant decrease by approximately 30% in norepinephrine uptake-1 carrier density in functional classes ii to iii and iv myocardium versus nonfailing myocardium (p < 0.05). 
this defect in the failing heart can be mimicked by the effects of uptake blocking agents, such as cocaine and desipramine, in the nonfailing heart only. 
compromised norepinephrine uptake-1 in functional class iv cannot be further increased by cocaine and desipramine. 
in vitro activity of krm-1648, either singly or in combination with ofloxacin, against mycobacterium ulcerans.

the antimicrobial effect of a benzoxazinorifamycin, krm-1648, either alone or in combination with ofloxacin, was evaluated in vitro against two type strains and six clinical isolates of mycobacterium ulcerans. 
ulcerans was between 0.012 and 0.025 mg/l, while corresponding values for rifampicin and rifabutin were in the range of 0.1-0.8 mg/l and 0.1-0.4 mg/l respectively. 
when combined with ofloxacin, krm-1648 exhibited strong synergistic activity while only additive effects were observed with the combination of rifampicin (or rifabutin) and ofloxacin. 
interaction of ketamine and halothane in rats.

the interaction of intramuscularly injected ketamine and its n-demethylated metabolite (metabolite i) with halothane was evaluated in rats. 
however, halothane anesthetic requirement (i.e., mac) was depressed in a dose-dependent fashion as much as 56% 1-2 hours and as much as 14% 5-6 hours after injection of ketamine, 50 mg/kg, im. 
the reduction in mac was correlated with brain levels of ketamine or metabolite i, suggesting a ketamine:metabolite i potency ration of 3:1. 
the half-life of ketamine in plasma and brain was longer in the presence of halothane than when ketamine was given alone. 
it is concluded that ketamine is not a short-acting drug and that concomitant use with halothane would be expected to prolong further the duration of its action on the central nervous system.
repeated oral administration of coumaphos in sheep: interactions of coumaphos with bishydroxycoumarin, trichlorfon, and phenobarbital sodium.

interactions between treatments with coumaphos, bishydroxycoumarin (an anticoagulant), trichlorfon (an organophosphorous compound), and phenobarbital sodium (an inducer of microsomal enzymes) were investigated in sheep. 
a daily dose of 2 mg of coumaphos/kg of body weight for 6 days did not affect the plasma enzymes or the antiprothrombinemic effect of bishydroxy-coumarin in wethers. 
the treatment of ewes with an intravenous (iv) injection of trichlorfon, insufficient to produce significant inhibition of erythrocyte acetylcholinesterase (ache) activity, appeared to produce additive effects with those produced by subsequent treatment with 4 mg of coumaphos/kg/day. 
in ewes given 40 mg of phenobarbital sodium/kg for 5 days intraperitoneally (ip), the anticholinesterase effect of 4 mg of coumaphos/kg was significantly reduced and signs of toxicity were not present. 
to study the pancreatic effects of other agents, dynamic insulin and glucagon release was measured from the in vitro perfused pancreases of normal and diabetic chinese hamsters in response to various combinations of arginine (20mm), glucose (100 or 150 mg. per 100 ml.), and theophylline (10 mm). 
glucose, alone and in the presence of theophylline, caused subnormal insulin release and less suppression of glucagon release in the diabectics than in the normals. 
arginine, in the presence of glucose and theophylline, caused excessive glucagon release but nearly normal insulin release in the diabetics. 
arginine, in the absence of glucose or theophylline, caused excessive glucagon release in the diabetics and undetectable insulin release in either diabetics or normals. 
further, these results confirm that the diabetic chinese hamster's alpha and beta cells respond normally to theophylline, but are relatively insensitive to glucose.
neurochemical and functional consequences following 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,5,6-tetrahydropyridine (mptp) and methamphetamine.

the neurochemical and functional consequences following mptp administration to the rat were evaluated and compared to similar effects following methamphetamine administration. 
it was observed that mptp induced long lasting depletions of striatal dopamine concentrations and this neurotoxic effect could be prevented by pargyline pretreatment. 
the mptp-induced neuronal damage produced a tolerance to the disruptive effects of amphetamine and a supersensitivity to the disruptive effects of apomorphine in rats responding in a schedule controlled paradigm. 
methamphetamine, like mptp, produced depletions of striatal dopamine but these actions were potentiated by pargyline pretreatment. 
pharmacokinetic interaction between single oral doses of diltiazem and sirolimus in healthy volunteers.

aim and background: the pharmacokinetic interaction between sirolimus, a macrolide immunosuppressant metabolized by cyp3a4, and the calcium channel blocker diltiazem was studied in 18 healthy subjects. 
several clinically important interactions have previously been reported for other immunosuppressive drugs that are metabolized by the same enzyme and for calcium antagonists. 
methods: healthy subjects who were 20 to 43 years old participated in an open, three-period, randomized, crossover study of the pharmacokinetics of a single 10-mg oral dose of sirolimus, a single oral 120-mg dose of diltiazem, and the two drugs given together. 
results: the geometric mean (90% confidence interval) whole blood sirolimus area under the plasma concentration time-curve increased 60% (35%-90%), from 736 to 1178 ng x h/ml, and maximum concentration increased 43% (14%-81%), from 67 to 96 ng/ml, with diltiazem coadministration, whereas the mean elimination half-life of sirolimus decreased slightly, from 79 to 67 hours. 
apparent oral clearance and volume of distribution of sirolimus decreased with 38% and 45%, respectively, when sirolimus was given with diltiazem. 
the plasma maximum concentration and area under the plasma concentration-time curve of diltiazem, desacetyldiltiazem, and desmethyldiltiazem were unchanged after coadministration of sirolimus, and no potentiation of the effects of diltiazem on diastolic or systolic blood pressure or on the electrocardiographic parameters was seen. 
conclusions: single-dose diltiazem coadministration leads to higher sirolimus exposure, presumably by inhibition of the first-pass metabolism of sirolimus. 
because of the pronounced intersubject variability in the extent of the sirolimus-diltiazem interaction, whole blood sirolimus concentrations should be monitored closely in patients treated with the two drugs.
the 16,16-dimethylprostaglandin e2 (dmpge2)-induced diarrhea was analyzed in cecectomized rats prepared by resecting the cecum and its vasculature without disturbing the ileocecal junction. 
on the other hand, the enhanced secretion of colonic fluid by dmpge2, given intraluminally, was only half of that in control rats, whereas the colonic transit-enhancing effect of dmpge2 in cecectomized rats was more pronounced than in control rats at 15 but not at 30 min after its administration. 
loperamide and morphine (0.1 and 1.0 mg/kg, s.c.) 
loperamide and morphine (0.1 and 1.0 mg/kg, s.c.) inhibited the dmpge2 (0.3 mg/kg, p.o.)-induced diarrhea in cecectomized rats. 
n-methyllevallorphan (5 mg/kg, s.c.) completely antagonized the inhibitory effect of loperamide and partly antagonized the effect of morphine. 
increased hepatotoxicity of acetaminophen by concomitant administration of caffeine in the rat.
since caffeine is frequently co-administered with acetaminophen, it is of clinical interest to study the effect of caffeine on the hepatotoxicity of acetaminophen. 
careful observations on hepatotoxicity are suggested when acetaminophen is prescribed with caffeine.
interaction on the antinociceptive effect between neurotensin and enkephalins or tuftsin.

the aim of this paper was to study the interaction between neurotensin and both enkephalins or its synthetic analogue d-ala2-metenkephalinamide, or tuftsin, on the antinonciceptive effect of these peptides in mice after intracisternal injection. 
it was shown that neurotensin antagonized evidently the antinociceptive effect of enkephalins and their analogue. 
on the contrary, neurotensin and tuftsin were agonists in induction of analgesia. 
it is concluded that neurotensin modulates in an opposite way the function of the enkephalinergic neurons and the central action of tuftsin.
among the risk factors studied, two appear to increase the risk of are: the prescription of thiabendazole to treat strongyloidiasis during the melarsoprol cure and the bad general clinical conditions of patients. 
recommendations were to avoid administration of diffusible anti-helminthic treatment during the cure, and to improve the general conditions of patients before the cure of melarsoprol.
18-methoxycoronaridine (18-mc) and ibogaine: comparison of antiaddictive efficacy, toxicity, and mechanisms of action.

like ibogaine (40 mg/kg), 18-mc (40 mg/kg) decreases the intravenous self-administration of morphine and cocaine and the oral self-administration of ethanol and nicotine in rats; 
unlike ibogaine, 18-mc does not affect responding for a nondrug reinforcer (water). 
both ibogaine and 18-mc ameliorate opioid withdrawal signs. 
both ibogaine and 18-mc decrease extracellular levels of dopamine in the nucleus accumbens, but only ibogaine increases extracellular levels of serotonin in the nucleus accumbens. 
both ibogaine and 18-mc block morphine-induced and nicotine-induced dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens; 
only ibogaine enhances cocaine-induced increases in accumbal dopamine. 
both ibogaine and 18-mc enhance the locomotor and/or stereotypic effects of stimulants. 
ibogaine attenuates, but 18-mc potentiates, the acute locomotor effects of morphine; 
both compounds attenuate morphine-induced locomotion in morphine-experienced rats. 
ibogaine, but not 18-mc, decreases heart rate at high doses. 
while 18-mc and ibogaine have similar affinities for kappa opioid and possibly nicotinic receptors, 18-mc has much lower affinities than ibogaine for nmda and sigma-2 receptors, sodium channels, and the 5-ht transporter. 
both 18-mc and ibogaine are sequestered in fat and, like ibogaine, 18-mc probably has an active metabolite. 
the data suggest that 18-mc has a narrower spectrum of actions and will have a substantially greater therapeutic index than ibogaine.
molecular basis for the selective toxicity of amphotericin b for yeast and filipin for animal cells.
among the polyene antibiotics, many, like filipin, cannot be used clinically because they are toxic; 
both the toxicity of filipin and the therapeutic value of amphotericin b can be rationalized at the cellular and molecular level by the following observations: (i) these polyene antibiotics showed differential effects on cells; 
filipin was more potent in lysing human red blood cells, whereas amphotericin b was more potent in inhibiting yeast cell growth; 
and (ii) the effects of filipin were more efficiently inhibited by added cholesterol, the major membrane sterol in human cells, whereas the effects of amphotericin b were more efficiently inhibited by ergosterol, the major membrane sterol in yeast. 
clinical implications of warfarin interactions with five sedatives.

the intensity, uniformity and time course of anticoagulant interference by phenobarbital, secobarbital, glutethimide, chloral hydrate and methaqualone were systematically investigated in 16 patients receiving coumarin therapy. 
anticoagulant inhibition was observed during the administration of phenobarbital, secobarbital and glutethimide; 
there was no significant change in prothrombin test results during the trials of chloral hydrate and methaqualone. 
barbiturates and glutethimide should not be administered to patients receiving coumarin drugs. 
chloral hydrate and methaqualone interact pharmacologically with orally administered anticoagulant agents, but the effect is not clinically significant. 
it is concluded that chloral hydrate and methaqualone may be administered safely without additional caution in prothrombin test monitoring during oral anticoagulant therapy.
combinations of clozapine and phencyclidine: effects on drug discrimination and behavioral inhibition in rats.

phencyclidine (pcp) produces psychotomimetic effects in humans that resemble schizophrenia symptoms. 
in the present study, the atypical antipsychotic clozapine was tested in combination with an active dose of pcp in two-lever drug discrimination and mixed signalled-unsignalled differential-reinforcement-of-low-rates (drl) procedures. 
pcp produced distinctive effects in each task: it substituted for the training dose in pcp discrimination and it increased the number of responses with short (<3 s) interresponse times as well as increasing overall response rates in the drl schedule. 
acute dosing with clozapine failed to alter the behavioral effects of pcp in either procedure even when tested up to doses that produced pharmacological effects alone. 
these results suggest that acute dosing with clozapine would not affect behaviors most closely associated with pcp intoxication. 
since chronic dosing is required for therapeutic efficacy of antipsychotics, future studies should focus on investigation of chronic dosing effects of these drugs in combination with pcp.
enhanced theophylline clearance secondary to phenytoin therapy.

this report describes two cases in which theophylline clearance accelerated markedly with concomitant phenytoin administration. 
with combined use, clinicians should be aware, when phenytoin is added, of the potential for reexacerbation of pulmonary symptomatology due to lowered serum theophylline concentrations.
hypothermia as an index of the disulfiram-ethanol reaction in the rat.

decreased core temperature in female rats was investigated as one possible index of the disulfiram-ethanol reaction (der). 
core temperature was decreased in rats in a dose-dependent manner when ethanol was administered to rats treated with disulfiram 8 hours before the ethanol challenge. 
the decrease in temperature began within 20 minutes after ethanol administration, reaching a maximal decrease between 60 and 120 minutes post ethanol. 
maximal hypotension was found 120 minutes post ethanol, and returned to normal 300 minutes after ethanol. 
influence of coadministration of fluoxetine on cisapride pharmacokinetics and qtc intervals in healthy volunteers.

study objective: to evaluate the effect of fluoxetine on the pharmacokinetics and cardiovascular safety of cisapride at steady state in healthy men. 
and phase 3 (days 45-52): cisapride 10 mg 4 times/day (days 45-51) plus fluoxetine 20 mg/day (days 45-52). 
coadministration of fluoxetine significantly decreased cisapride plasma concentrations. 
there were no clinically significant changes in corrected qt intervals during administration of cisapride alone or with fluoxetine. 
cisapride was well tolerated when administered alone or with fluoxetine. 
conclusion: cisapride can be administered safely to patients receiving low therapeutic dosages of fluoxetine.
influence of estradiol and progesterone on the sensitivity of rat thoracic aorta to noradrenaline.

the aim of this study was to investigate the effects of low and high doses of estradiol, and of progesterone on the response to noradrenaline in rat thoracic aorta. 
injection of vehicle (corn oil, 0.1 ml/day), estradiol (10 microg/kg/day or 4 mg/kg/day) and/or progesterone (20 mg/kg/day), for eight days. 
aortic rings with intact endothelium from the high-dose (4 mg/kg/day) estradiol group were supersensitive to noradrenaline compared to the vehicle or low-dose (10 microg/kg/day) estradiol groups (pd2 values = 7.86+/-0.09, 7.30+/-0.11 and 7.35+/-0.04, respectively). 
endothelium-intact aortic rings from high-estradiol rats were supersensitive to noradrenaline when compared to vehicle-, progesterone- and progesterone + high-estradiol-treated rats (pd2 values = 7.77+/-0.12, 7.21+/-0.13, 6.93+/-0.04 and 7.22+/-0.18, respectively). 
sirolimus: mammalian target of rapamycin inhibitor to prevent kidney rejection.

sirolimus works differently from the immunosuppressants currently available, and except for increased lipid levels, the adverse reaction profile of sirolimus does not appear to overlap to any great extent with that associated with cyclosporine or tacrolimus. 
while additional research is needed, the initial clinical data in kidney recipients suggest that sirolimus, in combination with cyclosporine or tacrolimus, might have the potential to reduce the frequency of rejection episodes, permit reductions in cyclosporine or tacrolimus dosage, and permit steroid withdrawal (kelly, 1999).
longitudinal assessment of everolimus in de novo renal transplant recipients over the first post-transplant year: pharmacokinetics, exposure-response relationships, and influence on cyclosporine.

objective: our objective was to characterize the steady-state pharmacokinetics of everolimus and cyclosporine (inn, ciclosporin) when coadministered in de novo kidney allograft recipients during the first year after transplantation. 
method: this study was a multicenter randomized double-blind study of 101 patients who were randomly assigned 1:1:1 to receive everolimus tablets at doses of 0.5 mg, 1 mg, or 2 mg twice daily with cyclosporine and prednisone. 
blood sampling for the pharmacokinetics of everolimus and cyclosporine was performed on day 1, on weeks 1, 2, 3, and 4, and on months 2, 3, 6, 9, and 12. 
potential differences in cyclosporine dosing and pharmacokinetics at different levels of everolimus exposure were assessed in the context of anova. 
cyclosporine doses, trough concentrations, and auc exhibited similar temporal patterns during the course of the study regardless of the co-administered everolimus dose level (p = .13, .82, and .76, respectively). 
for a 4-fold range of everolimus doses there were no differential effects on cyclosporine dosing or pharmacokinetics.
differential actions of intrathecal naloxone on blocking the tail-flick inhibition induced by intraventricular beta-endorphin and morphine in rats.

the blockade of the spinal endorphinergic system by intrathecal naloxone on the production of tail-flick inhibition induced by intraventricular beta-endorphin and morphine was then studied. 
intraventricular injection of beta-endorphin and morphine produced an inhibition of the tail-flick response to the heat stimulus in rats. 
intrathecal injection of naloxone at doses of 0.4 to 40 micrograms caused a dose-related blockade of the inhibition of the tail-flick response induced by intraventricular injection of beta-endorphin, and a high dose of naloxone (40 micrograms) completely blocked the tail-flick inhibition induced by intraventricular beta-endorphin (16 micrograms). 
on the other hand, intrathecal naloxone (12-120 micrograms) had only a very weak effect on the tail-flick inhibition induced by intraventricular morphine (40 micrograms). 
intraventricular injection of naloxone at doses of 1.2 to 12 micrograms equally antagonized in a dose-dependent manner the tail-flick inhibition induced by intraventricular beta-endorphin and morphine. 
the results indicate that a spinal naloxone-sensitive endorphinergic system is involved in the production of beta-endorphin but not morphine-induced tail-flick inhibition, and suggest that intraventricular beta-endorphin and morphine elicit their pharmacological actions via the activation of different descending pain inhibitory systems; 
descending epsilon and mu systems for beta-endorphin and morphine, respectively, are proposed.
the purpose of this study was to evaluate the effect of sodium carboxymethylcellulose (nacmc) and carboxymethylcellulose-cysteine (cmc-cys) conjugates on the intestinal permeation of sodium fluorescein (naflu) and model peptide drugs, bacitracin and insulin. 
cysteine was covalently linked to carbodiimide activated nacmc. 
unmodified nacmc (1% m/v) significantly improved the transport ratio (r= p(app) polymer/ p(app) control) of naflu to 1.3 and 1% (m/v) nacmc conjugated with cysteine further enhanced the permeation. 
decreasing the concentration of cmc-cys, exhibiting 7.3% (m/m) of immobilised cysteine (cmc-cys7.3) from 1% (m/v) to 0.5% (m/v) decreased the r-value of naflu from 1.8 to 1.2. 
nacmc at 1% (m/v) in the presence of free cysteine had no significant effect on the r-value of naflu compared to nacmc alone. 
formulation of fluorescence labelled bacitracin and insulin in unconjugated nacmc (1% m/v) did not significantly improve the permeation, however in the presence of 1% (m/v) cmc-cys7.3 a significantly improved permeation was observed (r= 1.3). 
conjugation at nacmc with cysteine moieties significantly improves the intestinal permeation of the hydrophilic molecule naflu and the model peptide drugs bacitracin and insulin in vitro, therefore this conjugated system maybe useful for peroral administration of peptide drugs in the future.
enhancement of humoral immune responses to inactivated newcastle disease and avian influenza vaccines by oral administration of ginseng stem-and-leaf saponins in chickens.

the objective of this study was to evaluate the effect of oral administration of ginseng stem-and-leaf saponins (gsls) on the humoral immune responses of chickens to inactivated nd and ai vaccines. 
in experiment 1, oral administration of gsls at a dose of 5 mg/kg of bw for 7 d on the immune response in chickens intramuscularly injected with inactivated nd vaccine was evaluated. 
in experiment 2, the same regimen of gsls was administered to chickens inoculated with inactivated ai vaccines, and an enhanced serum antibody response to ai vaccination was also observed. 
considering the safety of gsls, because no adverse effect was found throughout the experiments, gsls may be a promising oral adjuvant to improve immunization in poultry.
[influence of hemantane and doxycycline on mptp-evoked behavior violations in c57bl/6 mice].

the effects of anti-parkinsonian drug hemantane [(2-adamantyl)hexamethylenimine] (10 mg/kg, p. o.) 
and/or antibiotic drug doxycycline (100 mg/kg, p. o.), as well as that of neurotoxin 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,4-tetrahydropyridine (mptp) (4 x 20 mg/kg, i. p.) 
acute administration of hemantane or doxycycline failed to influence locomotion in mice, while their combination normalized motor activity. 
to determine whether the co-injection of extracellular matrix degrading enzymes improves retinal transduction following intravitreal delivery of adeno-associated virus-2 (aav2).
aav2 containing cdna encoding enhanced green fluorescent protein (gfp), under the control of a chicken   -actin promoter, was delivered by intravitreal injection to adult mice in conjunction with enzymes including collagenase, hyaluronan lyase, heparinase iii, or chondroitin abc lyase. 
the addition of heparinase iii or chondroitin abc lyase greatly enhanced transduction of the retinal ganglion cell layer and increased the depth of transduction into the outer retina. 
hyaluronan lyase had a limited effect and collagenase was ineffective. 
electroretinograms survived with higher concentrations of heparinase iii and chondroitin abc lyase than were required for optimal retinal transduction. 
aav2-mediated retinal transduction is improved by co-injection of heparinase iii or chondroitin abc lyase. 
the aim of the present study was to investigate whether hb-egf is a therapeutic target for t-all, and to further elucidate the antitumor effects of a specific inhibitor of hb-egf, cross-reacting material 197 (crm197). 
we elucidated the expression of hb-egf in t-all cell lines, and evaluated the effect of crm197 on these cells alone or in combination with anticancer agent. 
crm197 induced apoptosis, and furthermore, the combination of crm197 plus doxorubicin enhanced cytotoxicity in a t-all cell line. 
distinct synergistic action of piperacillin and methylglyoxal against pseudomonas aeruginosa.

results revealed that the strains were resistant to many drugs at high levels, only piperacillin, carbenicillin, amikacin and ciprofloxacin showed resistances at comparatively lower levels. 
distinct and statistically significant synergism was observed between methylglyoxal and piperacillin by disc diffusion tests when compared with their individual effects. 
synergism was also noted when methylglyoxal was combined with carbenicillin and amikacin.
improved parathyroid hormone control by cinacalcet is associated with reduction in darbepoetin requirement in patients with end-stage renal disease.

uncontrolled hy-per-parathyroidism causes bone marrow fibrosis, leading to erythropoietin (epo) resistance. 
medical treatment with cinacalcet is effective in reducing plasma parathyroid hormone (pth) levels, but its effect on darbepoetin dosing is unknown. 
the primary objective of the study was to ascertain the difference in darbepoetin responsiveness before and after 12 months of cinacalcet therapy. 
reduction of pth by cinacalcet is associated with a decrease in darbepoetin requirement. 
tamoxifen, an estrogen antagonist, is the standard hormone treatment for breast cancer. 
paroxetine and fluoxetine reduce the plasma concentration of endoxifen by about 50%. 
it is better to avoid prescribing isoenzyme cyp 2d6 inhibitors to women treated with tamoxifen for breast cancer, especially ssri antidepressants such as paroxetine and fluoxetine. 
depression does not always require antidepressant drug therapy, and antidepressants have no proven preventive impact on hot flushes linked to the menopause. 
if in certain cases, an antidepressant is considered necessary, it may be advisable to replace tamoxifen with anastrozole.
implanon   failure in an hiv-positive woman on antiretroviral therapy resulting in two ectopic pregnancies.
we present an interesting case of an hiv-positive woman on antiretroviral therapy having tubal pregnancies on two separate occasions with implanon in place.
ephedrine enhances the antinociceptive effect of dexmedetomidine in mice.

the purpose of this study was to evaluate whether the psychostimulant drug ephedrine has any effect on dexmedetomidine-induced antinociception and locomotor inhibitor activity in mice in acute application.
saline + saline, ephedrine (10   mg/kg) + saline, saline + dexmedetomidine (15     g/kg) and ephedrine (10   mg/kg) + dexmedetomidine (15     g/kg), intraperitoneally, 30 min before hot plate or holed open field tests. 
in the hot plate test in mice, co-administration of 15     g/kg dexmedetomidine with 10   mg/kg ephedrine intraperitoneally not only enhanced, but also prolonged the duration of antinociception induced by dexmedetomidine. 
at the same time, the locomotor inhibitory effect of dexmedetomidine was counteracted by ephedrine. 
we concluded that the combined administration of dexmedetomidine with ephedrine may have beneficial effects in the treatment of pain without causing sedation, which limits the use of dexmedetomidine as an analgesic in humans.
interaction of celecoxib with different anti-cancer drugs is antagonistic in breast but not in other cancer cells.

this study investigates the ability of cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors to sensitize cells from different origins to several chemotherapeutic agents. 
the sensitivity, cell cycle, apoptosis and dna damage of five different cancer cell lines (hela, hct116, hepg2, mcf7 and u251) to 5-fu, cisplatin, doxorubicin and etoposide   celecoxib following different incubation schedules were analyzed.
we found antagonism between celecoxib and the four drugs in the breast cancer cells mcf7 following all incubation schedules and between celecoxib and doxorubicin in all cell lines except for two combinations in hct116 cells. 
these results, if confirmed in-vivo, indicate that celecoxib is not a suitable chemosensitizer for breast cancer or with doxorubicin for other cancers. 
the 3-deazaneplanocin a (dznep), one of s-adenosylhomocysteine (adohcy) hydrolase inhibitors, has shown antitumor activities in a broad range of solid tumors and acute myeloid leukemia. 
we also found that bcl-2 was overexpressed in dznep insensitive cells, and cotreatment with dznep and abt-737, a bcl-2 family inhibitor, synergistically inhibited growth and induced apoptosis of dznep insensitive mm cells. 
in addition, dznep insensitivity might be associated with overexpression of bcl-2, and the combination of abt-737 and dznep could synergistically induced apoptosis. 
the incubations were performed in the absence and presence of the non-specific cyp inhibitor, 1-aminobenzotriazole (abt) and isoform-specific inhibitors. 
abt decreased the toxicity of precocene i, increased exposure to parent compound, and decreased metabolite levels in a dose-dependent manner. 
of the isoform-specific cyp inhibitors tested for an effect on the precocene i metabolite profile, only tranylcypromine was noticeably effective, indicating a role of cyps 2a6, 2c9, 2cl9, and 2e1. 
with respect to toxicity, the order of cyp inhibitor effectiveness was abt>diethyldithiocarbamate~tranylcypromine>ketoconazole. 
furafylline and sulfaphenazole had no effect, while quinidine appeared to augment precocene i toxicity. 
these results suggest that rat liver slices do not reproduce the reported in vivo biotransformation of precocene i and therefore may not be an appropriate model for precocene i metabolism. 
lapatinib enhances herceptin-mediated antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity by up-regulation of cell surface her2 expression.

although it was previously reported that lapatinib combined with herceptin improved the progression-free survival rate compared with lapatinib alone for patients with herceptin-refractory her2-positive metastatic breast cancer, the mechanism is purported to be an antiproliferative effect relating to the synergism of these two agents.
we evaluated how lapatinib interacts with herceptin in her2-positive breast cancer, with a particular focus on herceptin-mediated antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (adcc). 
in an in vitro assay, lapatinib induced her2 expression at the cell surface of her2-positive breast cancer cell lines, leading to the enhancement of herceptin-mediated adcc. 
furthermore, we present a case report in which a second herceptin treatment following lapatinib resulted in the marked shrinkage of multiple metastatic tumors in her2-positive breast cancer. 
lapatinib may have the potential to convert herceptin-refractory to herceptin-sensitive tumors in her2-positive breast cancer by up-regulation of the cell surface expression of her2.
[efficacy of fixed combination amlodipine/valsartan in hospitalized patients with hypertensive disease]
efficacy and tolerability of fixed amlodipine/valsartan combination was studied in 86 patients with hypertensive disease hospitalized in departments of general internal medicine or cardiology. 
all patients had indications for antihypertensive therapy and were randomized either to fixed combination amlodipine/valsartan (n=43) or to therapy which corresponded to the hospital formulary (n=43). 
rate of achievement of target bp with fixed combination amlodipine/valsartan (93%) was comparable with that on traditional therapy (90%). 
but the use of fixed combination amlodipine/valsartan compared with traditional therapy was associated with lower clinical and self measured bp, quicker achievement of target bp (5.8+/-2.3 and 9.2+/-1.8 days, respectively, 0.05), lesser number of antihypertensive drugs (2.5+/-0.6 and 3.0+/-0.9 days, respectively), lower rate of concealed inefficacy of treatment (12 and 31%, respectively, 0.05). 
we have demonstrated appropriateness of inhospital administration of fixed amlodipine/valsartan combination as an approach allowing to achieve target bp in shorter time, with the use of fewer antihypertensive drugs, and diminishing concealed inefficacy of treatment.
amphetamine locomotor sensitization and conditioned place preference in adolescent male and female rats neonatally treated with quinpirole.

the objective was to analyze the effects of neonatal quinpirole treatment on effects of amphetamine in adolescent rats using locomotor sensitization and conditioned place preference procedures. 
in female rats, neonatal quinpirole treatment enhanced amphetamine locomotor sensitization compared with quinpirole-free controls sensitized to amphetamine. 
male rats demonstrated sensitization to amphetamine, although this was muted compared with female rats, and were unaffected by neonatal quinpirole. 
rats treated with neonatal quinpirole enhanced time spent in the amphetamine-paired context compared with quinpirole-free controls conditioned with amphetamine, but only female controls conditioned with amphetamine spent more time in the drug-paired context compared with saline-treated controls. 
influence of piperine on ibuprofen induced antinociception and its pharmacokinetics.

in the present study piperine (10 mg/kg) significantly increased the dose-dependent antinociceptive activity of ibuprofen evaluated by both acetic acid writhing and formalin test, when it was administered with ibuprofen. 
ibuprofen plasma concentration was also increased when it was administered with piperine. 
the synergistic antinociception activity of ibuprofen when administered with piperine can be attributed to increased plasma concentration of ibuprofen. 
from this study it can be concluded that piperine can be used as a bioenhancer along with ibuprofen.
the role of p27(kip1) in dasatinib-enhanced paclitaxel cytotoxicity in human ovarian cancer cells.

the effect of dasatinib, an inhibitor of src and abl kinases, on paclitaxel sensitivity was measured in ovarian cancer cells and hey xenografts. 
the roles of p27(kip1), bcl-2, and cdk1 in apoptosis induced by dasatinib and paclitaxel were assessed using a terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dutp nick-end labeling (tunel) assay, sirna knockdown of gene expression, transfection with bcl-2 and cdk1 expression vectors, and flow cytometry. 
hey cells treated with dasatinib plus paclitaxel formed fewer colonies than did cells treated with either agent alone. 
treatment of hey xenograft-bearing mice with dasatinib plus paclitaxel inhibited tumor growth more than treatment with either agent alone (average tumor volume per mouse, dasatinib + paclitaxel vs paclitaxel: 0.28 vs. 0.81 cm3, difference = 0.53 cm3, 95% confidence interval [ci] = 0.44 to 0.62 cm3, p = .014); 
dasatinib + paclitaxel vs. 
the sirna knockdown of p27(kip1) decreased dasatinib- and paclitaxel-induced apoptosis compared with a negative control sirna (sub-g1 fraction, control sirna vs. p27(kip1) sirna: 42.5% vs. 20.1%, difference = 22.4%, 95% ci = 20.1% to 24.7%, p = .017). 
studies with forced expression and sirna knockdown of bcl-2 and cdk1 suggest that dasatinib-mediated induction of p27(kip1) enhanced paclitaxel-induced apoptosis by negatively regulating bcl-2 and cdk1 expression. 
inhibition of src family and abl kinases with either sirnas or dasatinib enhances paclitaxel sensitivity of ovarian cancer cells through p27(kip1)-mediated suppression of bcl-2 and cdk1 expression.
synergistic interaction between sunitinib and docetaxel is sequence dependent in human non-small lung cancer with egfr tkis-resistant mutation.
this study was aimed to investigate the efficacy of single use of sunitinib and that of concurrent or sequential administration of sunitinib and docetaxel in nsclc cell lines that are resistant to egfr tkis.
nsclc cell lines with egfr t790m mutation and k-ras mutation were exposed to either sunitinib or docetaxel or both based on various sequential administrations. 
sunitinib exhibited dose-dependent growth inhibition in nsclc cell lines and arrested cell cycle at g1 phase, whereas docetaxel arrested at s phase. 
although single or concurrent use of sunitinib and docetaxel has some anti-proliferative effects, the sequential administrations of both drugs remarkably enhanced anti-tumor activity. 
when cells were exposed to docetaxel followed by sunitinib, synergism was observed. 
the molecular basis of this synergism is that the signaling pathways that were initially activated by docetaxel exposure were efficiently suppressed by the subsequent exposure to sunitinib. 
sunitinib as a single agent exhibits anti-proliferative effects in vitro in nsclc cell lines with egfr t790m and k-ras mutations but the sequential administration of docetaxel followed by sunitinib is superior to sunitinib followed by docetaxel and concurrent administration.
ticagrelor (brilinta)--better than clopidogrel (plavix)
the fda has approved ticagrelor (brilinta-astrazeneca), an oral antiplatelet drug, for use with low-dose aspirin to reduce the rate of thrombotic cardiovascular events in patients with acute coronary syndrome (acs). 
it will compete with clopidogrel (plavix) and prasugrel (effient) for such use. 
in the present study, we tested whether the highly specific metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 antagonist, 3-[(2-methyl-1,3-thiazol-4-yl) ethynyl] pyridine, reduces dopaminergic and noradrenergic neuronal loss in monkeys rendered parkinsonian by chronic treatment with low doses of 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine. 
weekly intramuscular 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine injections (0.2-0.5 mg/kg body weight), in combination with daily administration of 3-[(2-methyl-1,3-thiazol-4-yl) ethynyl] pyridine or vehicle, were performed until the development of parkinsonian motor symptoms in either of the two experimental groups (1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine/3-[(2-methyl-1,3-thiazol-4-yl) ethynyl] pyridine versus 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine/vehicle). 
after 21 weeks of 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine treatment, all 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine/vehicle-treated animals displayed parkinsonian symptoms, whereas none of the 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine/3-[(2-methyl-1,3-thiazol-4-yl) ethynyl] pyridine-treated monkeys were significantly affected. 
these behavioural observations were consistent with in vivo positron emission tomography dopamine transporter imaging data, and with post-mortem stereological counts of midbrain dopaminergic neurons, as well as striatal intensity measurements of dopamine transporter and tyrosine hydroxylase immunoreactivity, which were all significantly higher in 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine/3-[(2-methyl-1,3-thiazol-4-yl) ethynyl] pyridine-treated animals than in 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine/vehicle-treated monkeys. 
the 3-[(2-methyl-1,3-thiazol-4-yl) ethynyl] pyridine treatment also had a significant effect on the 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine-induced loss of norepinephrine neurons in the locus coeruleus and adjoining a5 and a7 noradrenaline cell groups. 
in 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine/vehicle-treated animals, almost 40% loss of tyrosine hydroxylase-positive norepinephrine neurons was found in locus coeruleus/a5/a7 noradrenaline cell groups, whereas the extent of neuronal loss was lower than 15% of control values in 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine/3-[(2-methyl-1,3-thiazol-4-yl) ethynyl] pyridine-treated monkeys. 
our data demonstrate that chronic treatment with the metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 antagonist, 3-[(2-methyl-1,3-thiazol-4-yl) ethynyl] pyridine, significantly reduces 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine toxicity towards dopaminergic and noradrenergic cell groups in non-human primates. 
effect of ketoconazole-mediated cyp3a4 inhibition on clinical pharmacokinetics of panobinostat (lbh589), an orally active histone deacetylase inhibitor.

this study evaluated the effect of a potent cyp3a inhibitor, ketoconazole, on the pharmacokinetics and safety of panobinostat.
on day 8, a single panobinostat dose was co-administered with ketoconazole. 
in the presence of ketoconazole, there was 1.6- and 1.8-fold increase in c (max) and auc of panobinostat, respectively. 
co-administration of panobinostat with cyp3a inhibitors is feasible as the observed increase in panobinostat pk parameters was not considered clinically relevant. 
considering the variability in exposure following enzyme inhibition and the fact that chronic dosing of panobinostat was not studied with cyp3a inhibitors, close monitoring of panobinostat-related adverse events is necessary.
calcium does not inhibit the absorption of 5 milligrams of nonheme or heme iron at doses less than 800 milligrams in nonpregnant women.
calcium is the only known component in the diet that may affect absorption of both nonheme and heme iron. 
however, the evidence for a calcium effect on iron absorption mainly comes from studies that did not isolate the effect of calcium from that of other dietary components, because it was detected in single-meal studies. 
our objective was to establish potential effects of calcium on absorption of nonheme and heme iron and the dose response for this effect in the absence of a meal. 
we evaluated the effects of calcium doses between 200 and 1500 mg on absorption of 5 mg nonheme iron (as ferrous sulfate). 
we also evaluated the effects of calcium doses between 200 and 800 mg on absorption of 5 mg heme iron [as concentrated rbc (crbc)]. 
calcium was administered as calcium chloride in all studies and minerals were ingested on an empty stomach. 
calcium doses   1000 mg diminished nonheme iron absorption by an average of 49.6%.
a calcium dose of 800 mg diminished absorption of 5 mg heme iron by 37.7%. 
in conclusion, we demonstrated an isolated effect of calcium (as chloride) on absorption of 5 mg of iron provided as nonheme (as sulfate) and heme (as crbc) iron. 
evaluation of antidepressant like activity of curcumin and its combination with fluoxetine and imipramine: an acute and chronic study.

in the present study, the antidepressant like activity of curcumin and its combination with fluoxetine and imipramine was studied in acute model (three doses 24, 5 and 1 h before test) of forced swimming test (fst) in glass jar and tail suspension test (tst) in mice and in chronic model (14 day study) of fst with water wheel in rats. 
all the tests were carried out in the following seven groups (n = 6 in each group), drugs being given orally (doses for mice): group 1 (vehicle), group 2 (curcumin 50 mg/kg), group 3 (curcumin 100 mg/kg), group 4 (fluoxetine 20 mg/kg), group 5 (imipramine 15 mg/kg), group 6 (curcumin 100 mg/kg plus fluoxetine 20 mg/kg) and group 7 (curcumin 100 mg/kg plus imipramine 15 mg/kg). 
the effect of curcumin (100 mg/kg) was similar to that of fluoxetine and imipramine (p > 0.05) but its addition to fluoxetine and imipramine did not improve their antidepressant activity (p > 0.05). 
curcumin can be a useful antidepressant especially in cases which respond to drugs having mixed effects on serotonin and catecholamines levels in the brain.
prevention of emergence agitation in seven children receiving low-dose ketamine and propofol total intravenous anesthesia.

we retrospectively reviewed the records of 7 pediatric oncology patients who received low-dose ketamine in conjunction with propofol for total intravenous anesthesia (tiva) repeatedly for radiation therapy. 
ea signs were observed in all 7 patients in association with propofol tiva but did not recur in any of 123 subsequent anesthetics sessions during which low-dose ketamine was added to propofol. 
based on this experience, we suggest that low-dose ketamine added to propofol may be associated with prevention of ea in children with a history of ea with propofol tiva.
antidepressant-warfarin interaction and associated gastrointestinal bleeding risk in a case-control study.

we sought to evaluate whether initiation of an antidepressant increases the risk of hospitalization for gastrointestinal bleeding in warfarin users.
in total, 430,455 warfarin users contributed 407,370 person-years of warfarin use. 
warfarin users had an increased odds ratio of gastrointestinal bleeding upon initiation of citalopram (or   =   1.73 [95% ci, 1.25-2.38]), fluoxetine (or   =   1.63 [95% ci, 1.11-2.38]), paroxetine (or   =   1.64 [95% ci, 1.27-2.12]), amitriptyline (or   =   1.47 [95% ci, 1.02-2.11]). 
also mirtazapine, which is not believed to interact with warfarin, increased the risk of gi bleeding (or   =   1.75 [95% ci, 1.30-2.35]). 
warfarin users who initiated citalopram, fluoxetine, paroxetine, amitriptyline, or mirtazapine had an increased risk of hospitalization for gastrointestinal bleeding. 
in vitro activity of minocycline combined with fosfomycin against clinical isolates of methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus.

this study aimed to evaluate the in vitro activity of minocycline combined with fosfomycin against isolates of methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus (mrsa). 
the susceptibility results for minocycline and fosfomycin were interpreted according to the most relevant criteria. 
the combination of minocycline and fosfomycin can be synergistic against mrsa. 
in vivo cyp3a activity is significantly lower in cyclosporine-treated as compared with tacrolimus-treated renal allograft recipients.

in vitro studies have identified cyclosporine and tacrolimus as cyp3a inhibitors. 
systemic and apparent oral midazolam clearance were 24% (269    73 vs. 354    102  ml/min, p = 0.022) and 31% (479    190 vs. 688    265  ml/min, p = 0.013), respectively, lower in cyclosporine-treated patients (n = 20) than in matched tacrolimus-treated patients (n = 20). 
the latter displayed midazolam clearances similar to those in two larger cohorts of nonmatched tacrolimus-treated patients (n = 58 and n = 80) and to those receiving a calcineurin inhibitor-free regimen (n = 6). 
this implies that in vivo hepatic and first-pass cyp3a activities are significantly lower in patients receiving cyclosporine than in those receiving tacrolimus, indicating that, at the doses generally used in clinical practice, cyclosporine is the stronger of the two with respect to cyp3a inhibition. 
phase i trial of lenalidomide and cci-779 in patients with relapsed multiple myeloma: evidence for lenalidomide-cci-779 interaction via p-glycoprotein.

the preclinical combination of lenalidomide with the mtor inhibitor cci-779 has displayed synergy in vitro and represents a novel combination in mm.
interaction study of moxifloxacin and lomefloxacin with co-administered drugs.

moxifloxacin and lomefloxacin are fluoroquinolone antibiotics used in treating urinary and respiratory tract infections. 
being moxifloxacin and lomefloxacin fluoroquinolones the interaction study of was carried out with sucralfate, gelusil, erythromycin and multi minerals. 
the response of moxifloxacin and lomefloxacin after interaction with co-administered drugs at different conditions and temperature were noted using a shimadzu hplc system with pda detector. 
moxifloxacin and lomefloxacin reacts faster with sucralfate and gelusil in acidic media whereas with erythromycin in basic media and multi-minerals in neutral media. 
interaction of dacarbazine and imexon, in vitro and in vivo, in human a375 melanoma cells.

we evaluated mechanisms of interaction between the alkyating agent dacarbazine (dtic) and the pro-oxidant, imexon, in the human a375 melanoma cell line.
the effect of dtic and imexon, alone and in combination, was evaluated for growth inhibition (mtt), radiolabeled drug uptake, cellular thiol content (hplc), and dna strand breaks (comet assay). 
there was a >75% reduction in cellular glutathione and cysteine with imexon but not dtic. 
imexon and dacarbazine show additive effects in vitro but not in vivo in human a375 melanoma cells.
exposure to oral s-ketamine is unaffected by itraconazole but greatly increased by ticlopidine.

this study examined drug-drug interactions of oral s-ketamine with the cytochrome p450 (cyp) 2b6 inhibitor ticlopidine and the cyp3a inhibitor itraconazole. 
in this randomized, blinded, crossover study, 11 healthy volunteers ingested 0.2 mg/kg s-ketamine after pretreatments with oral ticlopidine (250 mg twice daily), itraconazole (200 mg once daily), or placebo in 6-day treatment periods at intervals of 4 weeks. 
ticlopidine treatment increased the mean area under the plasma concentration-time curve extrapolated to infinity (auc(0-   )) of oral ketamine by 2.4-fold, whereas itraconazole treatment did not increase the exposure to s-ketamine. 
the ratio of norketamine auc(0-   ) to ketamine auc(0-   ) was significantly decreased in the ticlopidine (p &lt; 0.001) and itraconazole phases (p = 0.006) as compared to placebo. 
in the ticlopidine and itraconazole phases, the areas under the effect-time curves (self-reported drowsiness and performance) were significantly higher than those in the placebo phase (p < 0.05). 
the findings suggest that the dosage of s-ketamine should be reduced in patients receiving ticlopidine.
the authors report the case of an infant with confirmed congenital hypothyroidism on levothyroxine who experienced a possible drug interaction with simeticone. 
questioning revealed the child was taking infacol drops before feeds while on levothyroxine. 
drug interaction of thyroxine with simeticone has not been reported previously and is not listed in the british national formulary for children. 
protective effect of acetyl-l-carnitine and  alpha lipoic acid against the acute toxicity of diepoxybutane to human lymphocytes.
(ii) acetyl-l-carnitine elicits a significant protective effect on deb induced toxicity, which was potentiated by  alpha-lipoic acid.
[interaction between clopidogrel and proton pump inhibitors].

the drug interaction between proton pump inhibitors and clopidogrel has been the subject of much study in recent years. 
contradictory results regarding the effect of proton pump inhibitors on platelet reactivity and on clinical outcome in clopidogrel-treated patients have been reported in literature. 
concomitant use of omeprazole and clopidogrel was found to decrease the exposure (auc) to clopidogrel's active metabolite by 50% and to sharply increase platelet reactivity, as a result of inhibition by omeprazole of cyp2c19, a cytochrome p450 (cyp) enzyme. 
pantoprazole has a much weaker effect on clopidogrel's pharmacokinetics and on platelet reactivity during concomitant use. 
the influence of the other proton pump inhibitors when used simultaneously with clopidogrel has not yet been investigated in adequately randomized studies. 
regulatory agencies state that the combination of clopidogrel and the cyp2c19 inhibitors omeprazole and esomeprazole should be avoided. 
to date, there is no conclusive evidence of a clinically-relevant interaction between any of the proton pump inhibitors and clopidogrel.
a study published in 2002 found that vigabatrin causes a statistically significant increase in plasma clearance of carbamazepine. 
in 1984, drs rimmer and richens at the university of wales reported that administering vigabatrin with phenytoin lowered the serum phenytoin concentration in patients with treatment-resistant epilepsy. 
cholestyramine: concomitant cholestyramine administration decreased the mean auc of total ezetimibe approximately 55%. 
the incremental ldl-c reduction due to adding ezetimibe to cholestyramine may be reduced by this interaction. 
fibrates: the safety and effectiveness of ezetimibe administered with fibrates have not been established. 
co-administration of zetia with fibrates is not recommended until use in patients is studied. 
fenofibrate: in a pharmacokinetic study, concomitant fenofibrate administration increased total ezetimibe concentrations approximately 1.5-fold. 
gemfibrozil: in a pharmacokinetic study, concomitant gemfibrozil administration increased total ezetimibe concentrations approximately 1.7-fold. 
hmg-coa reductase inhibitors: no clinically significant pharmacokinetic interactions were seen when ezetimibe was co-administered with atorvastatin, simvastatin, pravastatin, lovastatin, or fluvastatin. 
cyclosporine: the total ezetimibe level increased 12-fold in one renal transplant patient receiving multiple medications, including cyclosporine. 
patients who take both ezetimibe and cyclosporine should be carefully monitored. 
carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility a 104-week dietary carcinogenicity study with ezetimibe was conducted in rats at doses up to 1500 mg/kg/day (males) and 500 mg/kg/day (females) (~20 times the human exposure at 10 mg daily based on auc0-24hr for total ezetimibe). 
a 104-week dietary carcinogenicity study with ezetimibe was also conducted in mice at doses up to 500 mg/kg/day (>150 times the human exposure at 10 mg daily based on auc0-24hr for total ezetimibe). 
in oral (gavage) fertility studies of ezetimibe conducted in rats, there was no evidence of reproductive toxicity at doses up to 1000 mg/kg/day in male or female rats (~7 times the human exposure at 10 mg daily based on auc0-24hr for total ezetimibe). 
in rabbits treated with ezetimibe, an increased incidence of extra thoracic ribs was observed at 1000 mg/kg/day (150 times the human exposure at 10 mg daily based on auc0-24hr for total ezetimibe). 
multiple dose studies of ezetimibe given in combination with hmg-coa reductase inhibitors (statins) in rats and rabbits during organogenesis result in higher ezetimibe and statin exposures. 
when zetia is administered with an hmg-coa reductase inhibitor in a woman of childbearing potential, refer to the pregnancy category and package labeling for the hmg-coa reductase inhibitor. 
the interaction of cylert (pemoline) with other drugs has not been studied in humans. 
decreased seizure threshold has been reported in patients receiving cylert concomitantly with antiepileptic medications.
administration of paclitaxel in combination with herceptin resulted in a two-fold decrease in herceptin clearance in a non-human primate study and in a 1.5-fold increase in herceptin serum levels in clinical studies.
however, ketoconazole, a potent inhibitor of cytochrome p450 3a4, may increase plasma levels of mometasone furoate during concomitant dosing.
interaction with other central nervous system depressants: meperidine should be used with great caution and in reduced dosage in patients who are concurrently receiving other narcotic analgesics, general anesthetics, phenothiazines, other tranquilizers, sedative-hypnotics (including barbiturates), tricyclic antidepressants and other cns depressants (including alcohol). 
mao inhibitors and beta adrenergic blockers increase the effects of pseudoephedrine. 
sympathomimetics may reduce the antihypertensive effects of methyldopa, mecamylamine, reserpine and veratrum alkaloids.
antacids: absorption of a single dose of myfortic was decreased when administered to 12 stable renal transplant patients also taking magnesium-aluminum containing antacids (30 ml): the mean cmax and auc(0-t) values for mpa were 25% and 37% lower, respectively, than when myfortic was administered alone under fasting conditions. 
it is recommended that myfortic and antacids not be administered simultaneously. 
cyclosporine: when studied in stable renal transplant patients, cyclosporine, usp (modified) pharmacokinetics were unaffected by steady state dosing of myfortic. 
acyclovir/ganciclovir: may be taken with myfortic; 
both acyclovir/ganciclovir and mpag concentrations are increased in the presence of renal impairment, their coexistence may compete for tubular secretion and further increase in the concentrations of the two. 
azathioprine/mycophenolate mofetil: given that azathioprine and mycophenolate mofetil inhibit purine metabolism, it is recommended that myfortic not be administered concomitantly with azathioprine or mycophenolate mofetil. 
cholestyramine and drugs that bind bile acids: these drugs interrupt enterohepatic recirculation and reduce mpa exposure when coadministered with mycophenolate mofetil. 
therefore, do not administer myfortic with cholestyramine or other agents that may interfere with enterohepatic recirculation or drugs that may bind bile acids, for example bile acid sequestrates or oral activated charcoal, because of the potential to reduce the efficacy of myfortic. 
oral contraceptives: given the different metabolism of myfortic and oral contraceptives, no drug interaction between these two classes of drug is expected. 
however, in a drug-drug interaction study, mean levonorgesterol auc was decreased by 15% when coadministered with mycophenolate mofetil. 
therefore, it is recommended that oral contraceptives are co- administered with myfortic with caution and additional birth control methods be considered. 
live vaccines: during treatment with myfortic, the use of live attenuated vaccines should be avoided and patients should be advised that vaccinations may be less effective. 
interference of mpag hydrolysis may lead to less mpa available for absorption.
do not exceed a 5 mg daily dose of vesicare when administered with therapeutic doses of ketoconazole or other potent cyp3a4 inhibitors. 
patients with congenital or acquired qt prolongation in a study of the effect of solifenacin on the qt interval in 76 healthy women, the qt prolonging effect appeared less with solifenacin 10 mg than with 30 mg (three times the maximum recommended dose), and the effect of solifenacin 30 mg did not appear as large as that of the positive control moxifloxacin at its therapeutic dose. 
if glucocorticoid replacement is required, the glucocorticoid dose should be carefully adjusted. 
limited published data indicate that gh treatment increases cytochrome p450 (cp450) mediated antipyrine clearance in man. 
these data suggest that gh administration may alter the clearance of compounds known to be metabolized by cp450 liver enzymes (e.g., corticosteroids, sex steroids, anticonvulsants, cyclosporin). 
ketoconazole: spontaneous adverse reaction reports of patients taking concomitant ketoconazole with recommended doses of terfenadine demonstrate qt interval prolongation and rare serious cardiac events, e.g. 
pharmacokinetic data indicate that ketoconazole markedly inhibits the metabolism of terfenadine, resulting in elevated plasma terfenadine levels. 
concomitant administration of ketoconazole and terfenadine is contraindicated. 
itraconazole: torsades de pointes and elevated parent terfenadine levels have been reported during concomitant use of terfenadine and itraconazole in clinical trials of itraconazole and from foreign post-marketing sources. 
concomitant administration of itraconazole and terfenadine is contraindicated. 
due to the chemical similarity of other azole-type antifungal agents (including fluconazole, metronidazole, and miconazole) to ketoconazole, and itraconazole, concomitant use of these products with terfenadine is not recommended pending full examination of potential interactions. 
macrolides: clinical drug interaction studies indicate that erythromycin and clarithromycin can exert an effect on terfenadine metabolism by a mechanism which may be similar to that of ketoconazole, but to a lesser extent. 
a few spontaneous accounts of qt interval prolongation with ventricular arrhythmia including torsades de pointes, have been reported in patients receiving erythromycin or troleandomycin. 
concomitant administration of terfenadine with clarithromycin, erythromycin, or troleandomycin is contraindicated: pending full characterization of potential interactions, concomitant administration of terfenadine with other macrolide antibiotics, including azithromycin, is not recommended. 
studies to evaluate potential interactions of terfenadine with azithromycin are in progress.
since mexitil is a substrate for the metabolic pathways involving cyp2d6 and cyp1a2 enzymes, inhibition or induction of either of these enzymes would be expected to alter mexiletine plasma concentrations. 
in a formal, single-dose interaction study (n = 6 males) the clearance of mexiletine was decreased by 38% following the coadministration of fluvoxamine, an inhibitor of cyp1a2. 
in another formal study (n = 8 extensive and n = 7 poor metabolizers of cyp2d6), coadministration of propafenone did not alter the kinetics of mexiletine in the poor cyp2d6 metabolizer group. 
in this crossover steady state study, the pharmacokinetics of propafenone were unaffected in either phenotype by the coadministration of mexiletine. 
addition of mexiletine to propafenone did not lead to further electrocardiographic parameters changes of qrs, qtc, rr, and pr intervals than propafenone alone. 
when concomitant administration of either of these two drugs with mexiletine is initiated, the dose of mexiletine should be slowly titrated to desired effect. 
in a large compassionate use program mexitil    has been used concurrently with commonly employed antianginal, antihypertensive, and anticoagulant drugs without observed interactions. 
a variety of antiarrhythmics such as quinidine or propranolol were also added, sometimes with improved control of ventricular ectopy. 
when phenytoin or other hepatic enzyme inducers such as rifampin and phenobarbital have been taken concurrently with mexitil   , lowered mexitil    plasma levels have been reported. 
in a formal study, benzodiazepines were shown not to affect mexitil    plasma concentrations. 
ecg intervals (pr, qrs, and qt) were not affected by concurrent mexitil    and digoxin, diuretics, or propranolol. 
concurrent administration of cimetidine and mexitil    has been reported to increase, decrease, or leave unchanged mexitil    plasma levels; 
mexitil    does not alter serum digoxin levels but magnesium-aluminum hydroxide, when used to treat gastrointestinal symptoms due to mexitil   , has been reported to lower serum digoxin levels. 
concurrent use of mexitil    and theophylline may lead to increased plasma theophylline levels. 
this increase was observed at the first test point which was the second day after starting mexitil   . theophylline plasma levels returned to pre-mexitil    values within 48 hours after discontinuing mexitil   . if mexitil and theophylline are to be used concurrently, theophylline blood levels should be monitored, particularly when the mexitil    dose is changed. 
additionally, in one controlled study in five normal subjects and seven patients, the clearance of caffeine was decreased 50% following the administration of mexitil   .
drugs that induce hepatic enzymes such as phenobarbital, phenytoin and rifampin may increase the clearance of corticosteroids and may require increases in corticosteroid dose to achieve the desired response. 
drugs such as troleandomycin and ketoconazole may inhibit the metabolism of corticosteroids and thus decrease their clearance. 
corticosteroids may increase the clearance of chronic high dose aspirin. 
this could lead to decreased salicylate serum levels or increase the risk of salicylate toxicity when corticosteroid is withdrawn. 
aspirin should be used cautiously in conjunction with corticosteroids in patients suffering from hypoprothrombinemia. 
the effect of corticosteroids on oral anticoagulants is variable. 
there are reports of enhanced as well as diminished effects of anticoagulants when given concurrently with corticosteroids. 
methscopolamine may interact with antidepressants (tricyclic type), mao inhibitors (e.g., phenelzine, linezolid, tranylcypromine, isocarboxazid, selegiline, furazolidone), quinidine, amantadine, antihistamines (e.g., diphenhydramine), other anticholinergics, potassium chloride supplements, antacids, absorbent-type anti-diarrhea medicines (e.g., kaolin-pectin), phenothiazines (e.g., chlorpromazine, promethazine).
when administered concurrently, testolactone may increase the effects of oral anticoagulants; 
vasopressors, particularly metaraminol, may cause serious cardiac arrhythmias during halothane anesthesia and therefore should be used only with great caution or not at all. 
mao inhibitors: the pressor effect of sympathomimetic pressor amines is markedly potentiated in patients receiving monoamine oxidase inhibitors (maoi). 
the pressor response of adrenergic agents may also be potentiated by tricyclic antidepressants.
limited evidence suggests that ascorbic acid may influence the intensity and duration of action of bishydroxycoumarin.
pyrimethamine may be used with sulfonamides, quinine and other antimalarials, and with other antibiotics. 
folinic acid (leucovorin) should be administered until normal hematopoiesis is restored. 
mild hepatotoxicity has been reported in some patients when lorazepam and pyrimethamine were administered concomitantly.
coumarin-derivative anticoagulants: prolongation of prothrombin time (pt) and international normalized ratio (inr) were observed in patients receiving zolinza concomitantly with coumarin-derivative anticoagulants. 
physicians should carefully monitor pt and inr in patients concurrently administered zolinza and coumarin derivatives. 
other hdac inhibitors severe thrombocytopenia and gastrointestinal bleeding have been reported with concomitant use of zolinza and other hdac inhibitors (e.g., valproic acid). 
a multiple dose drug-drug interaction study demonstrated that ketoconazole approximately doubled paricalcitol auc0-   . since paricalcitol is partially metabolized by cyp3a and ketoconazole le is known to be a strong inhibitor of cytochrome p450 3a enzyme, care should be taken while dosing paricalcitol with ketoconazole and other strong p450 3a inhibitors including atazanavir, clarithromycin, indinavir, itraconazole, nefazodone, nelfinavir, ritonavir, saquinavir, telithromycin or voriconazole. 
dose adjustment of zemplar capsules may be required, and ipth and serum calcium concentrations should be closely monitored if a patient initiates or discontinues therapy with a strong cyp3a4 inhibitor such as ketoconazole. 
drugs that impair intestinal absorption of fat-soluble vitamins, such as cholestyramine, may interfere with the absorption of zemplar capsules.
the cns depressant effects of oxycodone hydrochloride may be additive with that of other cns depressants..
reduced absorption of folic acid and digoxin have been reported when those agents were administered concomitantly with sulfasalazine. 
when daily doses of sulfasalazine 2 g and weekly doses of methotrexate 7.5 mg were coadministered to 15 rheumatoid arthritis patients in a drug-drug interaction study, the pharmacokinetic disposition of the drugs was not altered. 
daily doses of sulfasalazine 2 g (maximum 3 g) and weekly doses of methotrexate 7.5 mg (maximum 15 mg) were administered alone or in combination to 310 rheumatoid arthritis patients in two controlled 52-week clinical studies. 
vindesine can interact with the drugs of the following categories:  - blood dyscrasia: can cause unpredictable myelotoxicity - bone marrow depressants: can cause a predictable dose-related myelotoxicity - radiation therapy: may cause marrow depression - neurotoxic medications: can cause neurologic toxicity - phenytoin: can increase seizure activity - live virus vaccines: may potentiate the replication of the vaccine virus, may increase the side effects of the vaccination, and decrease patient's response to the vaccine - mitomycin-c: may cause shortness of breath and bronchospasm - killed virus vaccines: may decrease patient's response to the vaccine
streptozocin has been reported to prolong the elimination half-life of doxorubicin and may lead to severe bone marrow suppression; 
a reduction of the doxorubicin dosage should be considered in patients receiving zanosar concurrently. 
the concurrent use of streptozocin and phenytoin has been reported in one case to result in reduced streptozocin cytotoxicity.    
ropivacaine should be used with caution in patients receiving other local anesthetics or agents structurally related to amide-type local anesthetics, since the toxic effects of these drugs are additive. 
in vivo, the plasma clearance of ropivacaine was reduced by 70% during coadministration of fluvoxamine (25 mg bid for 2 days), a selective and potent cyp1a2 inhibitor. 
thus strong inhibitors of cytochrome p4501a2, such as fluvoxamine, given concomitantly during administration of ropivacaine, can interact with ropivacaine leading to increased ropivacaine plasma levels. 
possible interactions with drugs known to be metabolized by cyp1a2 via competitive inhibition such as theophylline and imipramine may also occur. 
coadministration of a selective and potent inhibitor of cyp3a4, ketoconazole (100 mg bid for 2 days with ropivacaine infusion administered 1 hour after ketoconazole) caused a 15% reduction in in-vivo plasma clearance of ropivacaine.
the interaction of streptase, streptokinase, with other drugs has not been well studied. 
use of anticoagulants and antiplatelet agents -- streptase, streptokinase, alone or in combination with antiplatelet agents and anticoagulants, may cause bleeding complications. 
in the treatment of acute mi, aspirin, when not otherwise contraindicated, should be administered with streptokinase ( see below ). 
anticoagulation and antiplatelets after treatment for myocardial infarction -- in the treatment of acute myocardial infarction, the use of aspirin has been shown to reduce the incidence of reinfarction and stroke. 
the addition of aspirin to streptokinase causes a minimal increase in the risk of minor bleeding (3.9% vs. 3.1%), but does not appear to increase the incidence of major bleeding (see
concomitant administration of substances that are also tubularly secreted (e.g., probenecid) could potentially result in delayed clearance of alimta. 
although ibuprofen (400 mg qid) can be administered with alimta in patients with normal renal function (creatinine clearance    80 ml/min), caution should be used when administering ibuprofen concurrently with alimta to patients with mild to moderate renal insufficiency (creatinine clearance from 45 to 79 ml/min). 
patients with mild to moderate renal insufficiency should avoid taking nsaids with short elimination half-lives for a period of 2 days before, the day of, and 2 days following administration of alimta. 
in the absence of data regarding potential interaction between alimta and nsaids with longer half-lives, all patients taking these nsaids should interrupt dosing for at least 5 days before, the day of, and 2 days following alimta administration. 
anticoagulants (oral): the activity of oral anticoagulants may be potentiated by anti-vitamin-k activity attributed to methimazole.    
digitalis glycosides: serum digitalis levels may be increased when hyperthyroid patients on a stable digitalis glycoside regimen become euthyroid; 
theophylline: theophylline clearance may decrease when hyperthyroid patients on a stable theophylline regimen become euthyroid; 
however, in patients with paget's disease prior diphosphonate use appears to reduce the anti-resorptive response to calcitonin (salmon) nasal spray.
interactions for vitamin b2 (riboflavin):  alcohol - impairs the intestinal absorption of riboflavin
probenecid - concurrent use decreases gastrointestinal absorption of riboflavin; 
requirements for riboflavin may be increased in patients receiving probenecid.
probenecid competes with meropenem for active tubular secretion and thus inhibits the renal excretion of meropenem. 
therefore, the coadministration of probenecid with meropenem is not recommended. 
there is evidence that meropenem may reduce serum levels of valproic acid to subtherapeutic levels (therapeutic range considered to be 50 to 100    g/ml total valproate).
posicor inhibits some of the liver's ability to metabolize some other drugs - terfenadine, astemizole, cisapride, cyclosporine, and tricyclic antidepressants. 
the concomitant use of sanctura with other anticholinergic agents that produce dry mouth, constipation, and other anticholinergic pharmacological effects may increase the frequency and/or severity of such effects. 
drugs eliminated by active tubular secretion: although studies to assess drug-drug interactions with sanctura have not been conducted, sanctura has the potential for pharmacokinetic interactions with other drugs that are eliminated by active tubular secretion (e.g. digoxin, procainamide, pancuronium, morphine, vancomycin, metformin and tenofovir). 
coadministration of sanctura with drugs that are eliminated by active renal tubular secretion may increase the serum concentration of sanctura and/or the coadministered drug due to competition for this elimination pathway. 
vasopressors, particularly metaraminol, may cause serious cardiac arrhythmias during halothane anesthesia and therefore should be used only with great caution or not at all. 
mao inhibitors - the pressor effect of sympathomimetic pressor amines is markedly potentiated in patients receiving monoamine oxidase inhibitors (maoi). 
the pressor response of adrenergic agents may also be potentiated by tricyclic antidepressants.
these include sympathomimetic bronchodilators, methylxanthines, and oral and inhaled steroids. 
however, the co   administration of spiriva with other anticholinergic   containing drugs (e.g., ipratropium) has not been studied and is therefore not recommended.
mitotane has been reported to accelerate the metabolism of warfarin by the mechanism of hepatic microsomal enzyme induction, leading to an increase in dosage requirements for warfarin. 
therefore, physicians should closely monitor patients for a change in anticoagulant dosage requirements when administering mitotane to patients on coumarin-type anticoagulants. 
pharmacokinetic properties of abacavir were not altered by the addition of either lamivudine or zidovudine or the combination of lamivudine and zidovudine. 
no clinically significant changes to lamivudine or zidovudine pharmacokinetics were observed following concomitant administration of abacavir. 
abacavir has no effect on the pharmacokinetic properties of ethanol. 
ethanol decreases the elimination of abacavir causing an increase in overall exposure . the addition of methadone has no clinically significant effect on the pharmacokinetic properties of abacavir. 
in a study of 11 hiv-infected patients receiving methadone-maintenance therapy (40 mg and 90 mg daily) with 600 mg of ziagen twice daily (twice the currently recommended dose), oral methadone clearance increased 22% (90% ci 6% to 42%). 
carbidopa/levodopa: carbidopa/levodopa does not influence the pharmacokinetics of pramipexole in healthy volunteers (n= 10). 
selegiline: in healthy volunteers (n= 11), selegiline did not influence the pharmacokinetics of pramipexole. 
amantadine: population pharmacokinetic analysis suggests that amantadine is unlikely to alter the oral clearance of pramipexole (n= 54). 
cimetidine: cimetidine, a known inhibitor of renal tubular secretion of organic bases via the cationic transport system, caused a 50% increase in pramipexole auc and a 40% increase in half-life (n= 12). 
probenecid: probenecid, a known inhibitor of renal tubular secretion of organic acids via the aruonic transporter, did not noticeably influence pramipexole pharmacokinetics (n= 12). 
other drugs eliminated via renal secretion: population pharmacokinetic analysis suggests that coadministration of drugs that are secreted by the cationic transport system (e.g., cimetidine, ranitidine, diltiazem, triamterene, verapamil, quinidine, and quinine) decreases the oral clearance of pramipexole by about 20%, while those secreted by the anionic transport system (e.g., cephalosporins, penicillins, indomethacin, hydrochlorothiazide, and chlorpropamide) are likely to have little effect on the oral clearance of pramipexole. 
cyp interactions: inhibitors of cytochrome p450 enzymes would not be expected to affect pramipexole elimination because pramipexole is not appreciably metabolized by these enzymes in vivo or in vitro. 
dopamine antagonists: since pramipexole is a dopamine agonist, it is possible that dopamine antagonists, such as the neuroleptics (phenothiazines, butyrophenones, thioxanthenes) or metoclopramide, may diminish the effectiveness of mirapex. 
caution is advised for patients receiving high-dose aspirin and methazolamide concomitantly, as anorexia, tachypnea, lethargy, coma and death have been reported with concomitant use of high-dose aspirin and carbonic anhydrase inhibitors.
caution should be exercised when administering zadaxin therapy in combination with other immunomodulating drugs. 
tetracycline, a bacteriostatic antibiotic, may antagonize the bactericidal effect of penicillin and concurrent use of these drugs should be avoided.
drug interactions: women on oral contraceptives have shown a significant increase in plasma vitamin a levels.
mequitazine can interact with cns depressant, antichlolinergic, tca, maois, and alcohol.
barbiturates may decrease the effectiveness of oral contraceptives, certain antibiotics, quinidine, theophylline, corticosteroids, anticoagulants, and beta blockers.
trimethoprim may inhibit the hepatic metabolism of phenytoin. 
trimethoprim, given at a common clinical dosage, increased the phenytoin half-life by 51% and decreased the phenytoin metabolic clearance rate by 30%. 
ritalin may decrease the hypotensive effect of guanethidine. 
human pharmacologic studies have shown that ritalin may inhibit the metabolism of coumarin anticoagulants, anticonvulsants (phenobarbital, diphenylhydantoin, primidone), phenylbutazone, and tricyclic drugs (imipramine, clomipramine, desipramine). 
the safety of using methylphenidate in combination with clonidine or other centrally acting alpha-2 agonists has not been systemically evaluated.    
in a study in which 34 different drugs were tested, therapeutically relevant concentrations of tolbutamide, sodium salicylate and sulfamethizole displaced protein-bound teniposide in fresh human serum to a small but significant extent. 
therefore, caution should be used in administering vumon (teniposide injection) to patients receiving these other agents. 
there was no change in the plasma kinetics of teniposide when coadministered with methotrexate. 
an increase in intracellular levels of methotrexate was observed in vitro in the presence of teniposide.
patients receiving antibiotics and sulfonamides generally should not be treated with ganglion blockers.  
the action of mecamylamine may be potentiated by anesthesia, other antihypertensive drugs and alcohol.
preliminary evidence suggests that cimetidine inhibits mebendazole metabolism and may result in an increase in plasma concentrations of mebendazole.
in vitro studies with human liver microsomes showed that terbinafine does not inhibit the metabolism of tolbutamide, ethinylestradiol, ethoxycoumarin, and cyclosporine. 
this may be of clinical relevance for compounds predominantly metabolized by this enzyme, such as tricyclic antidepressants,    -blockers, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (ssris), and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (mao-is) type b, if they have a narrow therapeutic window. 
in vivo drug-drug interaction studies conducted in normal volunteer subjects showed that terbinafine does not affect the clearance of antipyrine or digoxin. 
terbinafine decreases the clearance of caffeine by 19%. 
terbinafine increases the clearance of cyclosporine by 15%. 
there have been spontaneous reports of increase or decrease in prothrombin times in patients concomitantly taking oral terbinafine and warfarin, however, a causal relationship between lamisil    tablets and these changes has not been established. 
terbinafine clearance is increased 100% by rifampin, a cyp450 enzyme inducer, and decreased 33% by cimetidine, a cyp450 enzyme inhibitor. 
terbinafine clearance is unaffected by cyclosporine. 
there is no information available from adequate drug-drug interaction studies with the following classes of drugs: oral contraceptives, hormone replacement therapies, hypoglycemics, theophyllines, phenytoins, thiazide diuretics, beta blockers, and calcium channel blockers.
anticoagulants anabolic steroids may increase sensitivity to oral anticoagulants. 
warfarin: a multidose study of oxandrolone, given as 5 or 10 mg bid in 15 healthy subjects concurrently treated with warfarin, resulted in a mean increase in s-warfarin half-life from 26 to 48 hours and auc from 4.55 to 12.08 ng*hr/ml: similar increases in r-warfarin half-life and auc were also detected. 
a 5.5-fold decrease in the mean warfarin dose from 6.13 mg/day to 1.13 mg/day (approximately 80-85% reduction of warfarin dose), was necessary to maintain a target inr of 1.5. 
when oxandrolone therapy is initiated in a patient already receiving treatment with warfarin, the inr or prothrombin time (pt) should be monitored closely and the dose of warfarin adjusted as necessary until a stable target inr or pt has been achieved. 
furthermore, in patients receiving both drugs, careful monitoring of the inr or pt, and adjustment of the warfarin dosage if indicated are recommended when the oxandrolone dose is changed or discontinued. 
oral hypoglycemic agents oxandrolone may inhibit the metabolism of oral hypoglycemic agents. 
adrenal steroids or acth in patients with edema, concomitant administration with adrenal cortical steroids or acth may increase the edema. 
methysergide may reverse the analgesic activity of narcotic analgesics. 
concurrent use with vasoconstrictor agents including ergot alkaloids, sumatriptan, and nicotine (e.g. smoking) may result in enhanced vasoconstriction.
although this has not occurred in in vitro studies with coumarin-type anticoagulants, interactions with coumarin-type anticoagulants have been reported with feldene since marketing, therefore, physicians should closely monitor patients for a change in dosage requirements when administering feldene to patients on coumarin-type anticoagulants and other highly protein-bound drugs. 
plasma levels of piroxicam are depressed to approximately 80% of their normal values when feldene is administered in conjunction with aspirin (3900 mg/day), but concomitant administration of antacids has no effect on piroxicam plasma levels . nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents, including feldene, have been reported to increase steady state plasma lithium levels. 
it is recommended that plasma lithium levels be monitored when initiating, adjusting and discontinuing feldene.
the effects of metoclopramide on gastrointestinal motility are antagonized by anticholinergic drugs and narcotic analgesics. 
additive sedative effects can occur when metoclopramide is given with alcohol, sedatives, hypnotics, narcotics, or tranquilizers. 
the finding that metoclopramide releases catecholamines in patients with essential hypertension suggests that it should be used cautiously, if at all, in patients receiving monoamine oxi-dase inhibitors. 
absorption of drugs from the stomach may be diminished (e.g., digoxin) by metoclopramide, whereas the rate and/or extent of absorption of drugs from the small bowel may be increased (e.g., acetaminophen, tetracycline, levodopa, ethanol, cyclosporine). 
because the action of metoclopramide will influence the delivery of food to the intestines and thus the rate of absorption, insulin dosage or timing of dosage may require adjustment.
montelukast at a dose of 10 mg once daily dosed to pharmacokinetic steady state  - did not cause clinically significant changes in the kinetics of a single intravenous dose of theophylline (predominantly a cytochrome p450 1a2 substrate). 
- did not change the pharmacokinetic profile of warfarin (a substrate of cytochromes p450 2a6 and 2c9) or influence the effect of a single 30-mg oral dose of warfarin on prothrombin time or the inr (international normalized ratio). 
- did not change the plasma concentration profile of terfenadine (a substrate of cytochrome p450 3a4) or fexofenadine, its carboxylated metabolite, and did not prolong the qtc interval following co-administration with terfenadine 60 mg twice daily. 
montelukast at doses of    100 mg daily dosed to pharmacokinetic steady state:  - did not significantly alter the plasma concentrations of either component of an oral contraceptive containing norethindrone 1 mg/ethinyl estradiol 35 mcg. 
- did not cause any clinically significant change in plasma profiles of prednisone or prednisolone following administration of either oral prednisone or intravenous prednisolone.  
phenobarbital, which induces hepatic metabolism, decreased the auc of montelukast approximately 40% following a single 10-mg dose of montelukast. 
it is reasonable to employ appropriate clinical monitoring when potent cytochrome p450 enzyme inducers, such as phenobarbital or rifampin, are co-administered with montelukast. 
in drug-interaction studies, the recommended clinical dose of montelukast did not have clinically important effects on the pharmacokinetics of the following drugs: theophylline, prednisone, prednisolone, oral contraceptives (norethindrone 1 mg/ethinyl estradiol 35 mcg), terfenadine, digoxin, and warfarin. 
these medications included thyroid hormones, sedative hypnotics, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents, benzodiazepines, and decongestants. 
phenobarbital, which induces hepatic metabolism, decreased the auc of montelukast approximately 40% following a single 10-mg dose of montelukast. 
it is reasonable to employ appropriate clinical monitoring when potent cytochrome p450 enzyme inducers, such as phenobarbital or rifampin, are co-administered with montelukast.
no pharmacokinetic interaction between 85 mg/m2 eloxatin and infusional 5-fu has been observed in patients treated every 2 weeks. 
increases of 5-fu plasma concentrations by approximately 20% have been observed with doses of 130 mg/m2 eloxatin dosed every 3 weeks. 
the concomitant use of oxybutynin with other anticholinergic drugs or with other agents which produce dry mouth, constipation, somnolence (drowsiness), and/or other anticholinergic-like effects may increase the frequency and/or severity of such effects. 
mean oxybutynin chloride plasma concentrations were approximately 2 fold higher when ditropan xl was administered with ketoconazole, a potent cyp3a4 inhibitor. 
other inhibitors of the cytochrome p450 3a4 enzyme system, such as antimycotic agents (e.g., itraconazole and miconazole) or macrolide antibiotics (e.g., erythromycin and clarithromycin), may alter oxybutynin mean pharmacokinetic parameters (i.e., cmax and auc). 
concurrent ingestion of antacid (20 ml of antacid containing aluminum hydroxide, magnesium hydroxide, and simethicone) did not significantly affect the exposure of oxybutynin or desethyloxybutynin.    
although mivacron (a mixture of three stereoisomers) has been administered safely following succinylcholine-facilitated tracheal intubation, the interaction between mivacron and succinylcholine has not been systematically studied. 
prior administration of succinylcholine can potentiate the neuromuscular blocking effects of nondepolarizing agents. 
evidence of spontaneous recovery from succinylcholine should be observed before the administration of mivacron. 
the use of mivacron before succinylcholine to attenuate some of the side effects of succinylcholine has not been studied. 
there are no clinical data on the use of mivacron with other nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents. 
isoflurane and enflurane (administered with nitrous oxide/oxygen to achieve 1.25 m.c. 
a greater potentiation of the neuromuscular blocking effects of mivacron may be expected with higher concentrations of enflurane or isoflurane. 
other drugs which may enhance the neuromuscular blocking action of nondepolarizing agents such as mivacron include certain antibiotics (e.g., aminoglycosides, tetracyclines, bacitracin, polymyxins, lincomycin, clindamycin, colistin, and sodium colistimethate), magnesium salts, lithium, local anesthetics, procainamide, and quinidine. 
the neuromuscular blocking effect of mivacron may be enhanced by drugs that reduce plasma cholinesterase activity (e.g., chronically administered oral contraceptives, glucocorticoids, or certain monoamine oxidase inhibitors) or by drugs that irreversibly inhibit plasma cholinesterase . resistance to the neuromuscular blocking action of nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents has been demonstrated in patients chronically administered phenytoin or carbamazepine. 
while the effects of chronic phenytoin or carbamazepine therapy on the action of mivacron are unknown, slightly shorter durations of neuromuscular block may be anticipated and infusion rate requirements may be higher. 
some drug interactions are:  - birth control pills - corticosteroids - medicines for angina or high blood pressure - medicines for pain - medicines to control seizures such as phenytoin or carbamazepine - certain antibiotics given by injection - cisplatin - edrophonium - neostigmine - polymyxin b or bacitracin - local anesthetics such as procaine - general anesthetics - succinylcholine or other muscle relaxants
thalidomide has been reported to enhance the sedative activity of barbiturates, alcohol, chlorpromazine, and reserpine. 
oral contraceptives: in 10 healthy women, the pharmacokinetic profiles of norethindrone and ethinyl estradiol following administration of a single dose containing 1.0 mg of norethindrone acetate and 75    g of ethinyl estradiol were studied. 
important non-thalidomide drug interactions drugs that interfere with hormonal contraceptives: concomitant use of hiv-protease inhibitors, griseofulvin, modafinil, penicillins, rifampin, rifabutin, phenytoin, carbamazepine, or certain herbal supplements such as st. 
john's wort with hormonal contraceptive agents may reduce the effectiveness of the contraception and up to one month after discontinuation of these concomitant therapies. 
pharmacokinetic studies show that there are no significant alterations in pharmacokinetic parameters of zidovudine or rifabutin to warrant dosage adjustment when megestrol acetate is administered with these drugs. 
a pharmacokinetic study demonstrated that coadministration of megestrol acetate and indinavir results in a significant decrease in the pharmacokinetic parameters (~36% for cmax and ~28% for auc) of indinavir. 
administration of a higher dose of indinavir should be considered when coadministering with megestrol acetate. 
the effects of indinavir, zidovudine or rifabutin on the pharmacokinetics of megestrol acetate were not studied.
digoxin: there was a slight increase in the area under the curve (auc, 11%) and mean peak drug concentration (cmax, 18%) of digoxin with the co-administration of 100 mg sitagliptin for 10 days. 
no dosage adjustment of digoxin or januvia is recommended.
sulfamethizole may increase the effects of barbiturates, tolbutamide, and uricosurics. 
it may also interact with thiazides (increased thrombocytopenia), cyclosporine (increased nephrotoxicity), sulfonylurea agents (increased hypoglycemic response), warfarin (increased anticoagulant effect), methotrexate (decreased renal excretion of methotrexate), phenytoin (decreased hepatic clearance of phenytoin).
patients receiving lithium and neulasta should have more frequent monitoring of neutrophil counts.
other short-acting beta adrenergic aerosol bronchodilators should not be used concomitantly with maxair autohaler because they may have additive effects.
concomitant administration of vancomycin and anesthetic agents has been associated with erythema and histamine-like flushing and anaphylactoid reactions. 
concurrent and/or sequential systemic or topical use of other potentially neurotoxic and/or nephrotoxic drugs, such as amphotericin b, aminoglycosides, bacitracin, polymyxin b, colistin, viomycin, or cisplatin, when indicated, requires careful monitoring.
interactions for vitamin b1 (thiamine):  loop diuretics, oral contraceptives, stavudine, tricyclic antidepressants
acromegalic patients with diabetes mellitus being treated with insulin and/or oral hypoglycemic agents may require dose reductions of these therapeutic agents after the initiation of therapy with somavert. 
in clinical studies, patients on opioids often needed higher serum pegvisomant concentrations to achieve appropriate igf-i suppression compared with patients not receiving opioids. 
you cannot take mazindol if you have taken a monoamine oxidase inhibitor (maoi) such as isocarboxazid (marplan), tranylcypromine (parnate), or phenelzine (nardil) in the last 14 days. 
changes in insulin and other diabetes drug therapies may be necessary during treatment with mazindol.
mazindol may reduce the effects of guanethidine (ismelin). 
before taking this medication, tell your doctor if you are taking a tricyclic antidepressant such as amitriptyline (elavil), amoxapine (asendin), doxepin (sinequan), nortriptyline (pamelor), imipramine (tofranil), clomipramine (anafranil), protriptyline (vivactil), or desipramine (norpramin). 
drugs which may potentiate the myeloproliferative effects of leukine, such as lithium and corticosteroids, should be used with caution.
these are described in greater detail below:  oral hypoglycemics, coumarin-type anticoagulants, phenytoin, cyclosporine, rifampin, theophylline, terfenadine, cisapride, astemizole, rifabutin, tacrolimus, short-acting benzodiazepines,  oral hypoglycemics: clinically significant hypoglycemia may be precipitated by the use of diflucan with oral hypoglycemic agents; 
one fatality has been reported from hypoglycemia in association with combined diflucan and glyburide use. 
diflucan reduces the metabolism of tolbutamide, glyburide, and glipizide and increases the plasma concentration of these agents. 
when diflucan is used concomitantly with these or other sulfonylurea oral hypoglycemic agents, blood glucose concentrations should be carefully monitored and the dose of the sulfonylurea should be adjusted as necessary. 
coumarin-type anticoagulants: prothrombin time may be increased in patients receiving concomitant diflucan and coumarin-type anticoagulants. 
in post-marketing experience, as with other azole antifungals, bleeding events (bruising, epistaxis, gastrointestinal bleeding, hematuria, and melena) have been reported in association with increases in prothrombin time in patients receiving fluconazole concurrently with warfarin. 
careful monitoring of prothrombin time in patients receiving diflucan and coumarin-type anticoagulants is recommended. 
phenytoin: diflucan increases the plasma concentrations of phenytoin. 
careful monitoring of phenytoin concentrations in patients receiving diflucan and phenytoin is recommended. 
cyclosporine: diflucan may significantly increase cyclosporine levels in renal transplant patients with or without renal impairment. 
careful monitoring of cyclosporine concentrations and serum creatinine is recommended in patients receiving diflucan and cyclosporine. 
rifampin: rifampin enhances the metabolism of concurrently administered diflucan. 
depending on clinical circumstances, consideration should be given to increasing the dose of diflucan when it is administered with rifampin. 
theophylline: diflucan increases the serum concentrations of theophylline. 
careful monitoring of serum theophylline concentrations in patients receiving diflucan and theophylline is recommended. 
terfenadine: because of the occurrence of serious cardiac dysrhythmias secondary to prolongation of the qtc interval in patients receiving azole antifungals in conjunction with terfenadine, interaction studies have been performed. 
another study at a 400-mg and 800-mg daily dose of fluconazole demonstrated that diflucan taken in doses of 400 mg per day or greater significantly increases plasma levels of terfenadine when taken concomitantly. 
the combined use of fluconazole at doses of 400 mg or greater with terfenadine is contraindicated. 
the coadministration of fluconazole at doses lower than 400 mg/day with terfenadine should be carefully monitored. 
cisapride: there have been reports of cardiac events, including torsade de pointes in patients to whom fluconazole and cisapride were coadministered. 
a controlled study found that concomitant fluconazole 200 mg once daily and cisapride 20 mg four times a day yielded a significant increase in cisapride plasma levels and prolongation of qtc interval.
the combined use of fluconazole with cisapride is contraindicated. 
astemizole: the use of fluconazole in patients concurrently taking astemizole or other drugs metabolized by the cytochrome p450 system may be associated with elevations in serum levels of these drugs. 
rifabutin: there have been reports of uveitis in patients to whom fluconazole and rifabutin were coadministered. 
patients receiving rifabutin and fluconazole concomitantly should be carefully monitored. 
tacrolimus: there have been reports of nephrotoxicity in patients to whom fluconazole and tacrolimus were coadministered. 
patients receiving tacrolimus and fluconazole concomitantly should be carefully monitored. 
short-acting benzodiazepines: following oral administration of midazolam, fluconazole resulted in substantial increases in midazolam concentrations and psychomotor effects. 
this effect on midazolam appears to be more pronounced following oral administration of fluconazole than with fluconazole administered intravenously. 
if short-acting benzodiazepines, which are metabolized by the cytochrome p450 system, are concomitantly administered with fluconazole, consideration should be given to decreasing the benzodiazepine dosage, and the patients should be appropriately monitored. 
fluconazole tablets coadministered with ethinyl estradiol- and levonorgestrel-containing oral contraceptives produced an overall mean increase in ethinyl estradiol and levonorgestrel levels; 
however, in some patients there were decreases up to 47% and 33% of ethinyl estradiol and levonorgestrel levels. 
the data presently available indicate that the decreases in some individual ethinyl estradiol and levonorgestrel auc values with fluconazole treatment are likely the result of random variation. 
while there is evidence that fluconazole can inhibit the metabolism of ethinyl estradiol and levonorgestrel, there is no evidence that fluconazole is a net inducer of ethinyl estradiol or levonorgestrel metabolism. 
since trimetrexate is metabolized by a p450 enzyme system, drugs that induce or inhibit this drug metabolizing enzyme system may elicit important drug-drug interactions that may alter trimetrexate plasma concentrations. 
agents that might be coadministered with trimetrexate in aids patients for other indications that could elicit this activity include erythromycin, rifampin, rifabutin, ketoconazole, and fluconazole. 
in vitro perfusion of isolated rat liver has shown that cimetidine caused a significant reduction in trimetrexate metabolism and that acetaminophen altered the relative concentration of trimetrexate metabolites possibly by competing for sulfate metabolites. 
based on an in vitro rat liver model, nitrogen substituted imidazole drugs (clotrimazole, ketoconazole, miconazole) were potent, non-competitive inhibitors of trimetrexate metabolism. 
caution is recommended when administering nexavar with compounds that are metabolized/eliminated predominantly by the ugt1a1 pathway (e.g. irinotecan). 
concomitant treatment with nexavar resulted in a 21% increase in the auc of doxorubicin. 
caution is recommended when administering doxorubicin with nexavar. 
diuretics: patients on diuretics, and especially those started recently, may occasionally experience an excessive reduction of blood pressure after initiation of aceon    tablets therapy. 
the possibility of hypotensive effects can be minimized by either discontinuing the diuretic or increasing the salt intake prior to initiation of treatment with perindopril. 
if diuretics cannot be interrupted, close medical supervision should be provided with the first dose of aceon    tablets, for at least two hours and until blood pressure has stabilized for another hour. 
the rate and extent of perindopril absorption and elimination are not affected by concomitant diuretics. 
the bioavailability of perindoprilat was reduced by diuretics, however, and this was associated with a decrease in plasma ace inhibition. 
potassium supplements and potassium-sparing diuretics: aceon    tablets may increase serum potassium because of its potential to decrease aldosterone production. 
use of potassium-sparing diuretics (spironolactone, amiloride, triamterene and others), potassium supplements or other drugs capable of increasing serum potassium (indomethacin, heparin, cyclosporine and others) can increase the risk of hyperkalemia. 
lithium: increased serum lithium and symptoms of lithium toxicity have been reported in patients receiving concomitant lithium and ace inhibitor therapy. 
use of a diuretic may further increase the risk of lithium toxicity. 
digoxin: a controlled pharmacokinetic study has shown no effect on plasma digoxin concentrations when coadministered with aceon    tablets, but an effect of digoxin on the plasma concentration of perindopril/perindoprilat has not been excluded. 
gentamicin: animal data have suggested the possibility of interaction between perindopril and gentamicin. 
food interaction: oral administration of aceon    tablets with food does not significantly lower the rate or extent of perindopril absorption relative to the fasted state. 
however, the extent of biotransformation of perindopril to the active metabolite, perindoprilat, is reduced approximately 43%, resulting in a reduction in the plasma ace inhibition curve of approximately 20%, probably clinically insignificant. 
interaction with guanethidine: although minoxidil does not itself cause orthostatic hypotension, its administration to patients already receiving guanethidine can result in profound orthostatic effects. 
if at all possible guanethidine should be discontinued well before minoxidil is begun. 
when administered concomitantly with proamatine   , cardiac glycosides may enhance or precipitate bradycardia, a.v. 
the use of drugs that stimulate alpha-adrenergic receptors (e.g., phenylephrine, pseudoephedrine, ephedrine, phenylpropanolamine or dihydroergotamine) may enhance or potentiate the pressor effects of proamatine   . therefore, caution should be used when proamatine    is administered concomitantly with agents that cause vasoconstriction. 
proamatine    has been used in patients concomitantly treated with salt-retaining steroid therapy (i.e., fludrocortisone acetate), with or without salt supplementation. 
proamatine. alpha-adrenergic blocking agents, such as prazosin, terazosin, and doxazosin, can antagonize the effects of proamatine. potential for drug interactions: it appears possible, although there is no supporting experimental evidence, that the high renal clearance of desglymidodrine (a base) is due to active tubular secretion by the base-secreting system also responsible for the secretion of such drugs as metformin, cimetidine, ranitidine, procainamide, triamterene, flecainide, and quinidine. 
because ondansetron is metabolized by hepatic cytochrome p-450 drug-metabolizing enzymes (cyp3a4, cyp2d6, cyp1a2), inducers or inhibitors of these enzymes may change the clearance and, hence, the half-life of ondansetron. 
phenytoin, carbamazepine, and rifampicin: in patients treated with potent inducers of cyp3a4 (i.e., phenytoin, carbamazepine, and rifampicin), the clearance of ondansetron was significantly increased and ondansetron blood concentrations were decreased. 
however, on the basis of available data, no dosage adjustment for ondansetron is recommended for patients on these drugs.1,3  tramadol: although no pharmacokinetic drug interaction between ondansetron and tramadol has been observed, data from 2 small studies indicate that ondansetron may be associated with an increase in patient controlled administration of tramadol.4,5  chemotherapy: tumor response to chemotherapy in the p 388 mouse leukemia model is not affected by ondansetron. 
in humans, carmustine, etoposide, and cisplatin do not affect the pharmacokinetics of ondansetron.  
ondansetron did not increase blood levels of high-dose methotrexate.
the concomitant use of other cns depressants including sedatives, hypnotics, tranquilizers, general anesthetics, phenothiazines, other opioids, tricyclic antidepressants, monoamine oxidase (mao) inhibitors, and alcohol may produce additive cns depressant effects. 
anticholinergics or other medications with anticholinergic activity when used concurrently with opioid analgesics may result in increased risk of urinary retention and/or severe constipation, which may lead to paralytic ileus. 
it has been reported that the incidence of bradycardia was increased when oxymorphone was combined with propofol for induction of anesthesia. 
in addition, cns toxicity has been reported (confusion, disorientation, respiratory depression, apnea, seizures) following coadministration of cimetidine with opioid analgesics; 
patients studied in clinical trials of tnkase were routinely treated with heparin and aspirin. 
anticoagulants (such as heparin and vitamin k antagonists) and drugs that alter platelet function (such as acetylsalicylic acid, dipyridamole, and gp iib/iiia inhibitors) may increase the risk of bleeding if administered prior to, during, or after tnkase therapy. 
catecholamine-depleting drugs (e.g., reserpine) may have an additive effect when given with beta-blocking agents. 
drug-drug interactions effect of exelon    (rivastigmine tartrate) on the metabolism of other drugs: rivastigmine is primarily metabolized through hydrolysis by esterases. 
no pharmacokinetic interaction was observed between rivastigmine and digoxin, warfarin, diazepam, or fluoxetine in studies in healthy volunteers. 
the elevation of prothrombin time induced by warfarin is not affected by administration of exelon. 
effect of other drugs on the metabolism of exelon: drugs that induce or inhibit cyp450 metabolism are not expected to alter the metabolism of rivastigmine. 
single dose pharmacokinetic studies demonstrated that the metabolism of rivastigmine is not significantly affected by concurrent administration of digoxin, warfarin, diazepam, or fluoxetine. 
population pk analysis with a database of 625 patients showed that the pharmacokinetics of rivastigmine were not influenced by commonly prescribed medications such as antacids (n=77), antihypertensives (n=72), calcium channel blockers (n=75), antidiabetics (n=21), nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (n=79), estrogens (n=70), salicylate analgesics (n=177), antianginals (n=35), and antihistamines (n=15). 
use with anticholinergics: because of their mechanism of action, cholinesterase inhibitors have the potential to interfere with the activity of anticholinergic medications. 
use with cholinomimetics and other cholinesterase inhibitors: a synergistic effect may be expected when cholinesterase inhibitors are given concurrently with succinylcholine, similar neuromuscular blocking agents or cholinergic agonists such as bethanechol.
concurrent administration of bacteriostatic antibiotics (e.g., erythromycin, tetracycline) may diminish the bactericidal effects of penicillins by slowing the rate of bacterial growth. 
penicillin blood levels may be prolonged by concurrent administration of probenecid which blocks the renal tubular secretion of penicillins. 
displacement of penicillin from plasma protein binding sites will elevate the level of free penicillin in the serum.
in a pharmacokinetic study of 18 chronic hepatitis c patients concomitantly receiving methadone, treatment with peg-intron once weekly for 4 weeks was associated with a mean increase of 16% in methadone auc; 
in elderly patients concurrently receiving certain diuretics, primarily thiazides, an increased incidence of thrombopenia with purpura has been reported. 
it has been reported that sulfamethoxazole may prolong the prothrombin time in patients who are receiving the anticoagulant warfarin. 
sulfamethoxazole may inhibit the hepatic metabolism of phenytoin. 
at a 1.6-g dose, sulfamethoxazole produced a slight but significant increase in the half-life of phenytoin but did not produce a corresponding decrease in the metabolic clearance rate. 
sulfonamides can also displace methotrexate from plasma protein-binding sites, thus increasing free methotrexate concentrations. 
usage with alcohol: due to the potential for increased cns depressants effects, alcohol should be used with caution in patients who are currently receiving pentazocine.
anticholinesterases: concurrent use of procaine hydrochloride and anticholinesterase agents may result in increased systemic toxicity since anticholinesterases inhibit the breakdown of procaine hydrochloride. 
cns depressant medications: concurrent use of procaine hydrochloride and cns depressant medications may result in additive depressant effects. 
hyaluronidase: hyaluronidase may increase the diffusion rate of procaine hydrochloride, resulting in a decreased time of onset, but an increase in systemic toxicity. 
neuromuscular blocking agents (such as suxamethonium chloride): concurrent use of procaine hydrochloride and neuromuscular blocking agents may result in prolongation or enhancement of the neuromuscular blockade. 
sulfonamides: concurrent use of procaine hydrochloride and sulfonamides may result in a reduction of the antibacterial action of the sulfonamide. 
acetazolamide: concurrent use of acetazolamide and procaine hydrochloride may extend the plasma half-life of procaine.
melatonin may interact with the following drugs: aspirin and other nsaids (may lower melatonin levels), fluvoxamine (bioavailability of oral melatonin is increased with coadministration), beta blockers (may decrease melatonin levels), fluoxetine (reports of psychotic episodes when coadministered), progestin (coadministration of melatonin with progestin can inhibit ovarian function in women), benzodiazepenes and other sedating drugs (may result in additive sedation and an increased incidence of adverse effects), and corticosteroids (coadministration of melatonin and corticosteroids may interfere with the efficacy of the corticosteroids).
dosages of concomitantly administered opioids should be reduced by approximately half, because levomepromazine amplifies the therapeutic actions and side-effects of opioids. 
combination with tramadol (ultram) is associated with increased risk of seizures. 
additive sedative effects and confusional states may emerge if levomepromazine is given with benzodiazepines or barbiturates. 
exert particular caution in combining levomepromazine with other anticholinergic drugs (tricyclic antidepressants and antiparkinsonian-agents): particularly the elderly may develop delirium, high fever, severe obstipation, even ileus and glaucoma. 
caffeine and/or stimulantes of the ephedrine/amphetamine type may counteract the specific actions of levomepromazine. 
aminoglutethimide administered concomitantly with depo-subq provera 104 may significantly decrease the serum concentrations of mpa. 
the occurrence of stupor, muscular rigidity, severe agitation, and elevated temperature has been reported in some patients receiving the combination of selegiline and meperidine. 
this is typical of the interaction of meperidine and maois. 
severe toxicity has also been reported in patients receiving the combination of tricyclic antidepressants and eldepryl and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and eldepryl. 
one case of hypertensive crisis has been reported in a patient taking the recommended doses of selegiline and a sympathomimetic medication (ephedrine).
the bioavailability of skelid is decreased 80% by calcium, when calcium and skelid are administered at the same time, and 60% by some aluminum- or magnesium-containing antacids, when administered 1 hour before skelid. 
aspirin may decrease bioavailability of skelid by up to 50% when taken 2 hours after skelid. 
the bioavailability of skelid is increased 2-4 fold by indomethacin but is not significantly altered by coadministration of diclofenac. 
the pharmacokinetic parameters of digoxin are not significantly modified by skelid coadministration. 
in vitro studies show that tiludronate does not displace warfarin from its binding site on protein.
alcohol: in a multiple-dose study in 30 normal weight subjects, coadministration of xenical and 40 grams of alcohol (e.g., approximately 3 glasses of wine) did not result in alteration of alcohol pharmacokinetics, orlistat pharmacodynamics (fecal fat excretion), or systemic exposure to orlistat. 
cyclosporine: preliminary data from a xenical and cyclosporine drug interaction study indicate a reduction in cyclosporine plasma levels when xenical was coadministered with cyclosporine. 
digoxin: in 12 normal-weight subjects receiving xenical 120 mg three times a day for 6 days, xenical did not alter the pharmacokinetics of a single dose of digoxin. 
fat-soluble vitamin supplements and analogues: a pharmacokinetic interaction study showed a 30% reduction in beta-carotene supplement absorption when concomitantly administered with xenical. 
xenical inhibited absorption of a vitamin e acetate supplement by approximately 60%. 
the effect of orlistat on the absorption of supplemental vitamin d, vitamin a, and nutritionally-derived vitamin k is not known at this time. 
glyburide: in 12 normal-weight subjects receiving orlistat 80 mg three times a day for 5 days, orlistat did not alter the pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics (blood glucose-lowering) of glyburide. 
nifedipine (extended-release tablets): in 17 normal-weight subjects receiving xenical 120 mg three times a day for 6 days, xenical did not alter the bioavailability of nifedipine (extended-release tablets). 
oral contraceptives: in 20 normal-weight female subjects, the treatment of xenical 120 mg three times a day for 23 days resulted in no changes in the ovulation-suppressing action of oral contraceptives. 
phenytoin: in 12 normal-weight subjects receiving xenical 120 mg three times a day for 7 days, xenical did not alter the pharmacokinetics of a single 300-mg dose of phenytoin. 
pravastatin: in a 2-way crossover study of 24 normal-weight, mildly hypercholesterolemic patients receiving xenical 120 mg three times a day for 6 days, xenical did not affect the pharmacokinetics of pravastatin. 
warfarin: in 12 normal-weight subjects, administration of xenical 120 mg three times a day for 16 days did not result in any change in either warfarin pharmacokinetics (both r- and s-enantiomers) or pharmacodynamics (prothrombin time and serum factor vii). 
although undercarboxylated osteocalcin, a marker of vitamin k nutritional status, was unaltered with xenical administration, vitamin k levels tended to decline in subjects taking xenical. 
therefore, as vitamin k absorption may be decreased with xenical, patients on chronic stable doses of warfarin who are prescribed xenical should be monitored closely for changes in coagulation parameters.
potential for invega    to affect other drugs paliperidone is not expected to cause clinically important pharmacokinetic interactions with drugs that are metabolized by cytochrome p450 isozymes. 
given the primary cns effects of paliperidone, invega    should be used with caution in combination with other centrally acting drugs and alcohol. 
paliperidone may antagonize the effect of levodopa and other dopamine agonists. 
potential for other drugs to affect invega    paliperidone is not a substrate of cyp1a2, cyp2a6, cyp2c9, and cyp2c19, so that an interaction with inhibitors or inducers of these isozymes is unlikely. 
other beta adrenergic aerosol bronchodilators should not be used concomitantly with alupent    (metaproterenol sulfate usp) because they may have additive effects. 
beta adrenergic agonists should be administered with caution to patients being treated with monoamine oxidase inhibitors or tricyclic antidepressants, since the action of beta adrenergic agonists on the vascular system may be potentiated.
the cns-depressant effect of propoxyphene is additive with that of other cns depressants, including alcohol. 
such occurrences have been reported when propoxyphene was administered to patients on antidepressants, anticonvulsants, or warfarin-like drugs. 
scopolamine should be used with care in patients taking other drugs that are capable of causing cns effects such as sedatives, tranquilizers, or alcohol. 
e.g., other belladonna alkaloids, antihistamines (including meclizine), tricyclic antidepressants, and muscle relaxants. 
in addition to bleeding associated with heparin and vitamin k antagonists, drugs that alter platelet function (such as aspirin, dipyridamole, and abciximab) may increase the risk of bleeding if administered prior to or after retavase    therapy.
other eye drops or medications such as acetylcholine chloride (miochol) and carbachol (carboptic, isopto carbachol) may decrease the effects of suprofen ophthalmic.
use with other central nervous system depressants: the depressant effects of morphine are potentiated by the presence of other cns depressants such as alcohol, sedatives, antihistaminics, or psychotropic drugs. 
use of neuroleptics in conjunction with oral morphine may increase the risk of respiratory depression, hypotension and profound sedation or coma. 
interaction with mixed agonist/antagonist opioid analgesics: agonist/antagonist analgesics (i.e., pentazocine, nalbuphine, butorphanol, or buprenorphine) should not be administered to patients who have received or are receiving a course of therapy with a proof opioid agonist analgesic. 
skelaxin may enhance the effects of alcohol, barbiturates and other cns depressants.
ace inhibitors reports suggest that nsaids may diminish the antihypertensive effect of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) inhibitors. 
this interaction should be given consideration in patients taking nsaids concomitantly with ace inhibitors. 
aspirin: concomitant administration of aspirin (1000 mg tid) to healthy volunteers tended to increase the auc (10%) and cmax (24%) of meloxicam. 
however, as with other nsaids, concomitant administration of meloxicam and aspirin is not generally recommended because of the potential for increased adverse effects. 
concomitant administration of low-dose aspirin with mobic may result in an increased rate of gi ulceration or other complications, compared to use of mobic alone. 
mobic is not a substitute for aspirin for cardiovascular prophylaxis. 
cholestyramine: pretreatment for four days with cholestyramine significantly increased the clearance of meloxicam by 50%. 
cimetidine: concomitant administration of 200 mg cimetidine qid did not alter the single-dose pharmacokinetics of 30 mg meloxicam. 
digoxin: meloxicam 15 mg once daily for 7 days did not alter the plasma concentration profile of digoxin after b-acetyldigoxin administration for 7 days at clinical doses. 
in vitro testing found no protein binding drug interaction between digoxin and meloxicam. 
furosemide: clinical studies, as well as post-marketing observations, have shown that nsaids can reduce the natriuretic effect of furosemide and thiazide diuretics in some patients. 
studies with furosemide agents and meloxicam have not demonstrated a reduction in natriuretic effect. 
furosemide: single and multiple dose pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics are not affected by multiple doses of meloxicam. 
nevertheless, during concomitant therapy with furosemide and mobic, patients should be observed closely for signs of declining renal function, as well as to assure diuretic efficacy. 
lithium: in clinical trials, nsaids have produced an elevation of plasma lithium levels and a reduction in renal lithium clearance. 
in a study conducted in healthy subjects, mean pre-dose lithium concentration and auc were increased by 21% in subjects receiving lithium doses ranging from 804 to 1072 mg bid with meloxicam 15 mg qd as compared to subjects receiving lithium alone. 
patients on lithium treatment should be closely monitored when mobic is introduced or withdrawn. 
methotrexate: a study in 13 rheumatoid arthritis (ra) patients evaluated the effects of multiple doses of meloxicam on the pharmacokinetics of methotrexate taken once weekly. 
meloxicam did not have a significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of single doses of methotrexate. 
in vitro, methotrexate did not displace meloxicam from its human serum binding sites. 
warfarin: anticoagulant activity should be monitored, particularly in the first few days after initiating or changing mobic therapy in patients receiving warfarin or similar agents, since these patients are at an increased risk of bleeding. 
the effect of meloxicam on the anticoagulant effect of warfarin was studied in a group of healthy subjects receiving daily doses of warfarin that produced an inr (international normalized ratio) between 1.2 and 1.8. 
in these subjects, meloxicam did not alter warfarin pharmacokinetics and the average anticoagulant effect of warfarin as determined by prothrombin time. 
caution should be used when administering mobic with warfarin since patients on warfarin may experience changes in inr and an increased risk of bleeding complications when a new medication is introduced.
cimetidine: the effects of chronic cimetidine use on the metabolism of rimantadine are not known. 
when a single 100 mg dose of rimantadine hcl was administered one hour after the initiation of cimetidine (300 mg four times a day), the apparent total rimantadine clearance of this single dose in normal healthy adults was reduced by 18% (compared to the apparent total rimantadine clearance in the same subjects in the absence of cimetidine). 
acetaminophen: rimantadine hcl, 100 mg, was given twice daily for 13 days to 12 healthy volunteers. 
coadministration with acetaminophen reduced the peak concentration and auc values for rimantadine by approximately 11%. 
aspirin: rimantadine hcl, 100 mg, was given twice daily fro 13 days to 12 healthy volunteers. 
peak plasma concentrations and auc of rimantadine were reduced approximately 10% in the presence of aspirin.
drug interactions: the use of zemuron    (rocuronium bromide) injection before succinylcholine, for the purpose of attenuating some of the side effects of succinylcholine, has not been studied. 
if zemuron    is administered following administration of succinylcholine, it should not be given until recovery from succinylcholine has been observed. 
the median duration of action of zemuron    0.6 mg/kg administered after a 1 mg/kg dose of succinylcholine when t 1 returned to 75% of control was 36 minutes (range 14-57, n=12) vs. 
there are no controlled studies documenting the use of zemuron    before or after other nondepolarizing muscle relaxants. 
diuretics: excessive reductions in blood pressure may occur in patients on diuretic therapy when ace inhibitors are started. 
the possibility of hypotensive effects with univasc    can be minimized by discontinuing diuretic therapy for several days or cautiously increasing salt intake before initiation of treatment with univasc   . if this is not possible, the starting dose of moexpril should be reduced.. 
potassium supplements and potassium-sparing diuretics: univasc    can increase serum potassium because it decreases aldosterone secretion. 
use of potassium-sparing diuretics (spironolactone, triamterene, amiloride) or potassium supplements concomitantly with ace inhibitors can increase the risk of hyperkalemia. 
oral anticoagulants: interaction studies with warfarin failed to identify any clinically important effect on the serum concentrations of the anticoagulant or on its anticoagulant effect. 
lithium: increased serum lithium levels and symptoms of lithium toxicity have been reported in patients receiving ace inhibitors during therapy with lithium. 
if a diuretic is also used, the risk of lithium toxicity may be increased. 
other agents: no clinically important pharmacokinetic interactions occurred when univasc    was administered concomitantly with hydrochlorothiazide, digoxin, or cimetidine. 
univasc    has been used in clinical trials concomitantly with calcium-channel-blocking agents, diuretics, h2 blockers, digoxin, oral hypoglycemic agents, and cholesterol-lowering agents. 
drugs affecting hepatic metabolism the metabolism and pharmacokinetics of remeron soltab    (mirtazapine) orally disintegrating tablets may be affected by the induction or inhibition of drug-metab-olizing enzymes. 
while in vitro studies have shown that mirtazapine is not a potent inhibitor of any of these enzymes, an indication that mirtazapine is not likely to have a clinically significant inhibitory effect on the metabolism of other drugs that are substrates for these cytochrome p450 enzymes, the concomitant use of remeron soltab with most other drugs metabolized by these enzymes has not been formally studied. 
alcohol: concomitant administration of alcohol (equivalent to 60 g) had a minimal effect on plasma levels of mirtazapine (15 mg) in 6 healthy male subjects. 
however, the impairment of cognitive and motor skills produced by remeron    were shown to be additive with those produced by alcohol. 
accordingly, patients should be advised to avoid alcohol while taking remeron soltab. diazepam: concomitant administration of diazepam (15 mg) had a minimal effect on plasma levels of mirtazapine (15 mg) in 12 healthy subjects. 
however, the impairment of motor skills produced by remeron has been shown to be additive with those caused by diazepam. 
accordingly, patients should be advised to avoid diazepam and other similar drugs while taking remeron soltab.
cholestyramine: cholestyramine causes a 60% reduction in the absorption and enterohepatic cycling of raloxifene and should not be coadministered with evista. 
warfarin: the coadministration of evista and warfarin has not been assessed under chronic conditions. 
if evista is given concurrently with warfarin, prothrombin time should be monitored. 
in vitro, raloxifene did not affect the binding of warfarin, phenytoin, or tamoxifen. 
caution should be used when evista is coadministered with other highly protein-bound drugs, such as clofibrate, indomethacin, naproxen, ibuprofen, diazepam, and diazoxide. 
hypokalemia may develop during concomitant use of steroids or acth. 
thiazides may decrease arterial responsiveness to norepinephrine. 
thiazide drugs may increase the responsiveness of tubocurarine. 
lithium renal clearance is reduced by thiazides, increasing the risk of lithium toxicity. 
thiazides may add to or potentiate the action of other antihypertensive drugs. 
potentiation occurs with ganglionic or peripheral adrenergic blocking drugs.
chemet is not known to interact with other drugs including iron supplements; 
concomitant administration of chemet with other chelation therapy, such as cana 2 edta is not recommended. 
because there is a theoretical basis that these effects may be additive, use of ergotamine-containing or ergot-type medications (like dihydroergotamine or methysergide) and sumatriptan within 24 hours of each other should be avoided. 
mao-a inhibitors reduce sumatriptan clearance, significantly increasing systemic exposure. 
therefore, the use of sumatriptan succinate tablets in patients receiving mao-a inhibitors is contraindicated . selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (ssris) (e.g., fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine, sertraline) have been reported, rarely, to cause weakness, hyperreflexia, and incoordination when coadministered with sumatriptan. 
if concomitant treatment with sumatriptan and an ssri is clinically warranted, appropriate observation of the patient is advised.
coadministration of tritec with clarithromycin resulted in increased plasma ranitidine concentrations (57%), increased plasma bismuth trough concentrations (48%), and increased 14- hydroxy- clarithromycin plasma concentrations (31%). 
coadministration with aspirin results in a slight decrease in the rate of salicylate absorption that is clinically unimportant. 
coadministration with a high dose of antacid (170 meq) results in a 28% decrease in plasma concentrations of ranitidine and may decrease plasma concentrations of bismuth from tritec. 
for information on drug interactions associated with ranitidine, refer to the zantac     package insert.
drug-drug interactions: the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic interactions between flomax capsules and other alpha-adrenergic blocking agents have not been determined. 
however, interactions may be expected and flomax capsules should not be used in combination with other alpha-adrenergic blocking agents. 
the pharmacokinetic interaction between cimetidine and flomax capsules was investigated. 
therefore, flomax capsules should be used with caution in combination with cimetidine, particularly at doses higher than 0.4 mg. 
results from limited in vitro and in vivo drug-drug interaction studies between tamsulosin hci and warfarin are inconclusive. 
therefore, caution should be exercised with concomitant administration of warfarin and flomax capsules.        
phenothiazines are capable of potentiating cns depressants (e.g., barbiturates, anesthetics, opiates, alcohol, etc.) 
as well as atropine and phosphorous insecticides.
due to its effects on gastric emptying, symlin therapy should not be considered for patients taking drugs that alter gastrointestinal motility (e.g., anticholinergic agents such as atropine) and agents that slow the intestinal absorption of nutrients (e.g., alpha glucosidase inhibitors). 
when the rapid onset of a concomitant orally administered agent is a critical determinant of effectiveness (such as analgesics), the agent should be administered at least 1 hour prior to or 2 hours after symlin injection. 
in clinical trials, the concomitant use of sulfonylureas or biguanides did not alter the adverse event profile of symlin. 
no formal interaction studies have been performed to assess the effect of symlin on the kinetics of oral antidiabetic agents. 
mixing symlin and insulin the pharmacokinetic parameters of symlin were altered when mixed with regular, nph, and 70/30 premixed formulations of recombinant human insulin immediately prior to injection. 
thus, symlin and insulin should not be mixed and must be administered separately.
pilocarpine should be administered with caution to patients taking beta adrenergic antagonists because of the possibility of conduction disturbances. 
these effects should be considered when anticholinergic properties may be contributing to the therapeutic effect of concomitant medication (e.g., atropine, inhaled ipratropium). 
while no formal drug interaction studies have been performed, the following concomitant drugs were used in at least 10% of patients in either or both sj   grens efficacy studies: acetylsalicylic acid, artificial tears, calcium, conjugated estrogens, hydroxychloroquine sulfate, ibuprofen, levothyroxine sodium, medroxyprogesterone acetate, methotrexate, multivitamins, naproxen, omeprazole, paracetamol, and prednisone.
to minimize cns depression and possible potentiation, barbiturates, antihistamines, narcotics, hypotensive agents or phenothiazines should be used with caution. 
because matulane exhibits some monoamine oxidase inhibitory activity, sympathomimetic drugs, tricyclic antidepressant drugs (e.g., amitriptyline hcl, imipramine hcl) and other drugs and foods with known high tyramine content, such as wine, yogurt, ripe cheese and bananas, should be avoided. 
no cross-resistance with other chemotherapeutic agents, radiotherapy or steroids has been demonstrated.
when methyldopa is used with other antihypertensive drugs, potentiation of antihypertensive effect may occur. 
patients may require reduced doses of anesthetics when on methyldopa. 
when methyldopa and lithium are given concomitantly the patient should be carefully monitored for symptoms of lithium toxicity. 
several studies demonstrate a decrease in the bioavailability of methyldopa when it is ingested with ferrous sulfate or ferrous gluconate. 
coadministration of methyldopa with ferrous sulfate or ferrous gluconate is not recommended. 
methyldopa does not interfere with measurement of vma (vanillylmandelic acid), a test for pheochromocytoma, by those methods which convert vma to vanillin. 
while co-administration of zavesca    appeared to increase the clearance of cerezyme by 70%, these results are not conclusive because of the small number of subjects studied and because patients took variable doses of cerezyme. 
combination therapy with cerezyme    (imiglucerase) and zavesca    is not indicated.
because tetracyclines have been shown to depress plasma prothrombin activity, patients who are on anticoagulant therapy may require downward adjustment of their anticoagulant dosage. 
since bacteriostatic drugs may interfere with the bactericidal action of penicillin, it is advisable to avoid giving tetracycline class drugs in conjunction with penicillin. 
absorption of tetracyclines is impaired by antacids containing aluminum, calcium or magnesium, and iron-containing preparations. 
the concurrent use of tetracycline and methoxyflurane has been reported to result in fatal renal toxicity. 
concurrent use of tetracyclines with oral contraceptives may render oral contraceptives less effective.
prothrombin time or other suitable anticoagulation test should be monitored if tigecycline is administered with warfarin.   
concurrent use of antibacterial drugs with oral contraceptives may render oral contraceptives less effective.  
although specific drug or food interactions with mifepristone have not been studied, on the basis of this drug   s metabolism by cyp 3a4, it is possible that ketoconazole, itraconazole, erythromycin, and grapefruit juice may inhibit its metabolism (increasing serum levels of mifepristone). 
furthermore, rifampin, dexamethasone, st. 
john   s wort, and certain anticonvulsants (phenytoin, phenobarbital, carbamazepine) may induce mifepristone metabolism (lowering serum levels of mifepristone). 
a total of 11 clinical drug-drug interaction studies were conducted in healthy volunteers to evaluate the potential for interaction between mycamine and mycophenolate mofetil, cyclosporine, tacrolimus, prednisolone, sirolimus, nifedipine, fluconazole, ritonavir, and rifampin. 
there was no effect of a single dose or multiple doses of mycamine on mycophenolate mofetil, cyclosporine, tacrolimus, prednisolone, and fluconazole pharmacokinetics. 
sirolimus auc was increased by 21% with no effect on cmax in the presence of steady-state mycamine compared with sirolimus alone. 
nifedipine auc and cmax were increased by 18% and 42%, respectively, in the presence of steady-state mycamine compared with nifedipine alone. 
patients receiving sirolimus or nifedipine in combination with mycamine should be monitored for sirolimus or nifedipine toxicity and sirolimus or nifedipine dosage should be reduced if necessary. 
aggrastat has been studied on a background of aspirin and heparin. 
the use of aggrastat, in combination with heparin and aspirin, has been associated with an increase in bleeding compared to heparin and aspirin alone (see
cyp 3a4 inhibitors (e.g. macrolide antibiotics and protease inhibitors) there have been rare reports of serious adverse events in connection with the coadministration of certain ergot alkaloid drugs (e.g. dihydroergotamine and ergotamine) and potent cyp 3a4 inhibitors, resulting in vasospasm leading to cerebral ischemia and/or ischemia of the extremities. 
examples of some of the more potent cyp 3a4 inhibitors include macrolide antibiotics (e.g., erythromycin, troleandomycin, clarithromycin), hiv protease or reverse transcriptase inhibitors (e.g., ritonavir, indinavir, nelfinavir, delavirdine) or azole antifungals (e.g., ketoconazole, itraconazole, voriconazole). 
less potent inhibitors include saquinavir, nefazodone, fluconazole, grapefruit juice, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, zileuton, and clotrimazole. 
caution should be exercised when methergine    (methylergonovine maleate) is used concurrently with other vasoconstrictors or ergot alkaloids.
administration of valproic acid decreases oral clearance of temozolomide by about 5%. 
although a causal relationship has not been established, there have been reports of bleeding and/or prolonged prothrombin time in patients treated with trental with and without anticoagulants or platelet aggregation inhibitors. 
concomitant administration of trental and theophylline-containing drugs leads to increased theophylline levels and theophylline toxicity in some individuals. 
trental has been used concurrently with antihypertensive drugs, beta blockers, digitalis, diuretics, antidiabetic agents, and antiarrhythmics, without observed problems. 
thiazide diuretics may accentuate the orthostatic hypotension that may occur with phenothiazines. 
antihypertensive effects of guanethidine and related compounds may be counteracted when phenothiazines are used concomitantly. 
concomitant administration of propranolol with phenothiazines results in increased plasma levels of both drugs.
diuretics: furosemide and probably other loop diuretics given concomitantly with metolazone can cause unusually large or prolonged losses of fluid and electrolytes. 
other antihypertensives: when mykrox tablets are used with other antihypertensive drugs, care must be taken, especially during initial therapy. 
alcohol, barbiturates, and narcotics: the hypotensive effects of these drugs may be potentiated by the volume contraction that may be associated with metolazone therapy. 
digitalis glycosides: diuretic-induced hypokalemia can increase the sensitivity of the myocardium to digitalis. 
corticosteroids or acth: may increase the risk of hypokalemia and increase salt and water retention. 
lithium: serum lithium levels may increase. 
curariform drugs: diuretic-induced hypokalemia may enhance neuromuscular blocking effects of curariform drugs (such as tubocurarine) the most serious effect would be respiratory depression which could proceed to apnea. 
salicylates and other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs: may decrease the antihypertensive effects of mykrox tablets. 
sympathomimetics: metolazone may decrease arterial responsiveness to norepinephrine, but this diminution is not sufficient to preclude effectiveness of the pressor agent for therapeutic use. 
methenamine: efficacy may be decreased due to urinary alkalizing effect of metolazone. 
anticoagulants: metolazone, as well as other thiazide-like diuretics, may affect the hypoprothrombinemic response to anticoagulants; 
oral metronidazole has been reported to potentiate the anticoagulant effect of coumarin and warfarin, resulting in a prolongation of prothrombin time. 
drug interactions should be kept in mind when metrogel (metronidazole gel), 1% is prescribed for patients who are receiving anticoagulant treatment, although they are less likely to occur with topical metronidazole administration because of low absorption.    
norepinephrine and dobutamine are incompatible with sodium bicarbonate solution. 
the addition of sodium bicarbonate to parenteral solutions containing calcium should be avoided, except where compatibility has been previously established. 
mutual inhibition of metabolism occurs with concurrent use of cyclosporin and methylprednisolone; 
convulsions have been reported with concurrent use of methylprednisolone and cyclosporin. 
drugs that induce hepatic enzymes such as phenobarbital, phenytoin, and rifampin may increase the clearance of methylprednisolone and may require increased in methylprednisolone dose to achieve the desired response. 
drugs such as troleandomycin and ketoconazole may inhibit the metabolism of methylprednisolone and thus decrease its clearance. 
methylprednisolone may increase the clearance of chronic high dose aspirin. 
this could lead to decreased salicylate serum levels or increase the risk of salicylate toxicity when methylprednisolone is withdrawn. 
aspirin should be used cautiously in conjunction with corticosteroids in patients suffering from hypoprothrombinemia. 
the effect of methylprednisolone on oral anticoagulants is variable. 
there are reports of enhanced as well as diminished effects of anticoagulant when given concurrently with corticosteroids. 
drug interactions: inhibitors of cyp3a4 isozymes: caution is advised when midazolam is administered concomitantly with drugs that are known to inhibit the cytochrome p450 3a4 enzyme system (ie, some drugs in the drug classes of azole antimycotics, protease inhibitors, calcium channel antagonists, and macrolide antibiotics). 
drugs such as erythromycin, diltiazem, verapamil, ketoconazole, fluconazole and itraconazole were shown to significantly increase the c max and auc of orally administered midazolam. 
although not studied, the potent cytochrome p450 3a4 inhibitors ritonavir and nelfinavir may cause intense and prolonged sedation and respiratory depression due to a decrease in plasma clearance of midazolam. 
inducers of cyp3a4 isozymes: cytochrome p450 inducers, such as rifampin, carbamazepine, and phenytoin, induce metabolism and caused a markedly decreased c max and auc of oral midazolam in adult studies. 
the difficulty in achieving adequate sedation may have been the result of decreased absorption of the sedatives due to both the gastrointestinal effects and stimulant effects of methylphenidate. 
the sedative effect of versed syrup is accentuated by any concomitantly administered medication which depresses the central nervous system, particularly narcotics (eg, morphine, meperidine and fentanyl), propofol, ketamine, nitrous oxide, secobarbital and droperidol. 
no significant adverse interactions with common premedications (such as atropine, scopolamine, glycopyrrolate, diazepam, hydroxyzine, and other muscle relaxants) or local anesthetics have been observed.
based on studies evaluating possible interactions of pantoprazole with other drugs, no dosage adjustment is needed with concomitant use of the following: theophylline, cisapride, antipyrine, caffeine, carbamazepine, diazepam (and its active metabolite, desmethyldiazepam), diclofenac, naproxen, piroxicam, digoxin, ethanol, glyburide, an oral contraceptive (levonorgestrel/ethinyl estradiol), metoprolol, nifedipine, phenytoin, warfarin, midazolam, clarithromycin, metronidazole, or amoxicillin. 
therefore, when coadministered with pantoprazole, adjustment of the dosage of pantoprazole or of such drugs may not be necessary. 
there have been postmarketing reports of increased inr and prothrombin time in patients receiving proton pump inhibitors, including pantoprazole, and warfarin concomitantly. 
patients treated with proton pump inhibitors and warfarin concomitantly should be monitored for increases in inr and prothrombin time. 
because of profound and long lasting inhibition of gastric acid secretion, pantoprazole may interfere with absorption of drugs where gastric ph is an important determinant of their bioavailability (eg, ketoconazole, ampicillin esters, and iron salts). 
laboratory tests there have been reports of false-positive urine screening tests for tetrahydrocannabinol (thc) in patients receiving most proton pump inhibitors, including pantoprazole. 
some anticonvulsants may interact with mephenytoin. 
those anticonvulsants include divalproex sodium, valproic acid, and phenobarbital. 
mephenytoin may also affect the effects of other drugs, which include some steroid medications, warfarin, certain heart medicines, birth control pills, anti-infective medicines, furosemide and theophylline please note that mephenytoin may interact with other drugs that are not listed here.
in clinical studies of tobi, patients taking tobi concomitantly with dornase alfa (pulmozyme   , genentech), (beta)-agonists, inhaled corticosteroids, other anti-pseudomonal antibiotics, or parenteral aminoglycosides demonstrated adverse experience profiles similar to the study population as a whole. 
some diuretics can enhance aminoglycoside toxicity by altering antibiotic concentrations in serum and tissue. 
tobi should not be administered concomitantly with ethacrynic acid, furosemide, urea, or mannitol.
concomitant use of alcohol with phentermine hydrochloride may result in an adverse drug interaction.
an inhibitor of cyp2c8 (such as gemfibrozil) may increase the auc of rosiglitazone and an inducer of cyp2c8 (such as rifampin) may decrease the auc of rosiglitazone. 
drug interactions  there are no known drug/drug interactions with oral alkeran  vaccinations with live organism vaccines are not recommended in immunocompromised individuals  nalidixic acid together with high-dose intravenous melphalan has caused deaths in children due to haemorrhagic enterocolitis.  
impaired renal function has been described in bone marrow transplant patients who were conditioned with high-dose intravenous melphalan and who subsequently received cyclosporin to prevent graft-versus-host disease
the in vitro binding of warfarin to human plasma proteins is unaffected by tolmetin, and tolmetin does not alter the prothrombin time of normal volunteers. 
however, increased prothrombin time and bleeding have been reported in patients on concomitant tolectin and warfarin therapy. 
therefore, caution should be exercised when administering tolectin to patients on anticoagulants. 
in adult diabetic patients under treatment with either sulfonylureas or insulin there is no change in the clinical effects of either tolectin or the hypoglycemic agents. 
caution should be used if tolectin is administered concomitantly with methotrexate. 
tolectin and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs have been reported to reduce the tubular secretion of methotrexate in an animal model, possibly enhancing the toxicity of methotrexate. 
triprolidine may enhance the sedative effects of central nervous system depressants including alcohol, barbiturates, hypnotics, narcotic analgesics, sedatives, and tranquillisers. 
the effects of anticholinergic drugs, such as atropine and tricyclic antidepressants may be enhanced by the concomitant administration of triprolidine. 
aspirin and other salicylate drugs will be additive to disalcid and may increase plasma concentrations of salicylic acid to toxic levels. 
salicylates given concomitantly with anticoagulant drugs may predispose to systemic bleeding. 
salicylates may enhance the hypoglycemic effect of oral antidiabetic drugs of the sulfonylurea class. 
salicylate competes with a number of drugs for protein binding sites, notably penicillin, thiopental, thyroxine, triiodothyronine, phenytoin, sulfinpyrazone, naproxen, warfarin, methotrexate, and possibly corticosteroids. 
sulfoxone may increase the effects of barbiturates, tolbutamide, and uricosurics. 
it may also interact with thiazides (increased thrombocytopenia), cyclosporine (increased nephrotoxicity), sulfonylurea agents (increased hypoglycemic response), warfarin (increased anticoagulant effect), methotrexate (decreased renal excretion of methotrexate), phenytoin (decreased hepatic clearance of phenytoin).
co-administration of oral ketoconazole 200 mg twice daily increased retapamulin geometric mean auc(0-24) and cmax by 81% after topical application of retapamulin ointment, 1% on the abraded skin of healthy adult males. 
due to low systemic exposure to retapamulin following topical application in patients, dosage adjustments for retapamulin are unnecessary when co-administered with cyp3a4 inhibitors, such as ketoconazole. 
based on in vitro p450 inhibition studies and the low systemic exposure observed following topical application of altabax, retapamulin is unlikely to affect the metabolism of other p450 substrates. 
concurrent use of alcohol and other cns depression-producing drugs may increase the cns depressant effects of methyprylon or these other medications.
zidovudine competitively inhibits the intracellular phosphorylation of stavudine. 
therefore, use of zidovudine in combination with zerit should be avoided. 
in vitro data indicate that the phosphorylation of stavudine is also inhibited at relevant concentrations by doxorubicin and ribavirin. 
the induction dose requirements of diprivan injectable emulsion may be reduced in patients with intramuscular or intravenous premedication, particularly with narcotics (eg, morphine, meperidine, and fentanyl, etc.) 
and combinations of opioids and sedatives (eg, benzodiazepines, barbiturates, chloral hydrate, droperidol, etc.). 
during maintenance of anesthesia or sedation, the rate of diprivan injectable emulsion administration should be adjusted according to the desired level of anesthesia or sedation and may be reduced in the presence of supplemental analgesic agents (eg, nitrous oxide or opioids). 
the concurrent administration of potent inhalational agents (eg, isoflurane, enflurane, and halothane) during maintenance with diprivan injectable emulsion has not been extensively evaluated. 
diprivan injectable emulsion does not cause a clinically significant change in onset, intensity, or duration of action of the commonly used neuromuscular blocking agents (eg, succinylcholine and nondepolarizing muscle relaxants). 
no significant adverse interactions with commonly used premedications or drugs used during anesthesia or sedation (including a range of muscle relaxants, inhalational agents, analgesic agents, and local anesthetic agents) have been observed.
cyp3a4 inhibitors: ketoconazole, an inhibitor of the drug metabolizing enzyme cyp3a4, significantly increased plasma concentrations of tolterodine when coadministered to subjects who were poor metabolizers (see clinical pharmacology, variability in metabolism and drug-drug interactions). 
for patients receiving ketoconazole or other potent cyp3a4 inhibitors such as other azole antifungals (eg, itraconazole, miconazole) or macrolide antibiotics (eg, erythromycin, clarithromycin) or cyclosporine or vinblastine, the recommended dose of detrol la is 2 mg daily. 
aramine should be used with caution in digitalized patients, since the combination of digitalis and sympathomimetic amines may cause ectopic arrhythmias. 
monoamine oxidase inhibitors or tricyclic antidepressants may potentiate the action of sympathomimetic amines. 
there is usually complete cross-resistance between purinethol (mercaptopurine) and tabloid brand thioguanine. 
as there is in vitro evidence that aminosalicylate derivatives (e.g., olsalazine, mesalazine, or sulphasalazine) inhibit the tpmt enzyme, they should be administered with caution to patients receiving concurrent thioguanine therapy.    
trilostane may interact with aminoglutethimide or mitotane (causing too great a decrease in adrenal function).
when atropine and pralidoxime are used together, the signs of atropinization (flushing, mydriasis, tachycardia, dryness of the mouth and nose) may occur earlier than might be expected when atropine is used alone. 
this is especially true if the total dose of atropine has been large and the administration of pralidoxime has been delayed. 
2 - 4 the following precautions should be kept in mind in the treatment of anticholinesterase poisoning, although they do not bear directly on the use of pralidoxime: since barbiturates are potentiated by the anticholinesterases, they should be used cautiously in the treatment of convulsions; 
morphine, theophylline, aminophylline, succinylcholine, reserpine, and phenothiazine-type tranquilizers should be avoided in patients with organophosphate poisoning.
caution should be observed in administering demser to patients receiving phenothiazines or haloperidol because the extrapyramidal effects of these drugs can be expected to be potentiated by inhibition of catecholamine synthesis. 
concurrent use of demser with alcohol or other cns depressants can increase their sedative effects.
since celontin (methsuximide) may interact with concurrently administered antiepileptic drugs, periodic serum level determinations of these drugs may be necessary (eg methsuximide may increase the plasma concentrations of phenytoin and phenobarbital).
dopamine antagonists, such as the neuroleptics (phenothiazines, butyrophenones, thioxanthines ) or metoclopramide, ordinarily should not be administered concurrently with permax (a dopamine agonist); 
because pergolide mesylate is approximately 90% bound to plasma proteins, caution should be exercised if pergolide mesylate is coadministered with other drugs known to affect protein binding.
the following agents may increase certain actions or side effects of anticholinergic drugs: amantadine, antiarrhythmic agents of class i (e.g., quinidine), antihistamines, antipsychotic agents (e.g., phenothiazines), benzodiazepines, mao inhibitors, narcotic analgesics (e.g., meperidine), nitrates and nitrites, sympathomimetic agents, tricyclic antidepressants, and other drugs having anticholinergic activity. 
anticholinergics antagonize the effects of antiglaucoma agents. 
anticholinergic drugs in the presence of increased intraocular pressure may be hazardous when taken concurrently with agents such as corticosteroids. 
anticholinergic agents may affect gastrointestinal absorption of various drugs, such as slowly dissolving dosage forms of digoxin; 
anticholinergic drugs may antagonize the effects of drugs that alter gastrointestinal motility, such as metoclopramide. 
because antacids may interfere with the absorption of anticholinergic agents, simultaneous use of these drugs should be avoided. 
catecholamine-depleting drugs (e.g., reserpine) may have an additive effect when given with beta-blocking agents. 
pindolol has been used with a variety of antihypertensive agents, including hydrochlorothiazide, hydralazine, and guanethidine without unexpected adverse interactions. 
pindolol has been shown to increase serum thioridazine levels when both drugs are co-administered. 
co-administration of sutent with strong inhibitors of the cyp3a4 family (e.g., ketoconazole, itraconazole, clarithromycin, atazanavir, indinavir, nefazodone, nelfinavir, ritonavir, saquinavir, telithromycin, voriconizole) may increases sunitinib concentrations. 
co-administration of sutent with inducers of the cyp3a4 family (e.g., dexamethasone, phenytoin, carbamazepine, rifampin, rifabutin, rifapentin, phenobarbital, st. johns wort) may decrease sunitinib concentrations. 
the metabolism of metopirone is accelerated by phenytoin; 
metopirone inhibits the glucuronidation of acetaminophen and could possibly potentiate acetaminophen toxicity.
thiabendazole may compete with other drugs, such as theophylline, for sites of metabolism in the liver, thus elevating the serum levels of such compounds to potentially toxic levels. 
therefore, when concomitant use of thiabendazole and xanthine derivatives is anticipated, it may be necessary to monitor blood levels and/or reduce the dosage of such compounds. 
concomitant administrations not recommended:  - terfenadine and astemizole: certain macrolides interact with terfenadine and astemizole leading to increased serum concentrations of the latter. 
although such a reaction has not been demonstrated with roxithromycin, concomitant administration of roxithromycin with terfenadine or astemizole is not recommended. 
- cisapride, pimozide: other drugs such as cisapride or pimozide, which are metabolised by hepatic cyp3a isozymes have been associated with qt interval prolongation and/or cardiac arrythmias (typically torsades de pointe) as a result of increase in their serum level subsequent to interaction with significant inhibitors of the isozyme, including some macrolide antibacterials. 
although such a risk is not verified for roxithromycin, combination of roxithromycin with such drugs is not recommended.
